1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AML & CFT Guidelines 
For 
Reporting Entities 
Providing Services Related To 
Virtual Digital Assets  
 
2 
 
Table of Contents 
Contents 
Acronyms ......................................................................................................................................... 4 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 6 
1. 
Background ..................................................................................................................... 6 
2. 
Purpose of the guidelines ............................................................................................ 7 
3. 
Scope ................................................................................................................................. 8 
4. 
Effective Date .................................................................................................................. 8 
5. 
General Obligations of Service Providers (SPs) .................................................... 8 
5.1. 
Registration of SPs as Reporting Entities with FIU-IND ...................................... 8 
5.2. 
Policies and Procedures to Combat Money Laundering, Counter Terrorist 
Financing and Combat Proliferation Financing: (AML/CFT/CPF Program) ................ 8 
5.3. 
Internal policies, procedures, and controls signed off by the Board and 
Senior Management ................................................................................................................... 9 
5.4. 
Appointment of a Designated Director and a Principal Officer ......................... 9 
5.5. 
Training ........................................................................................................................... 11 
5.6. 
Internal Control/Audit .................................................................................................. 11 
5.7. 
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms ........................................................................ 11 
5.8. 
Client Due Diligence (CDD) Norms .......................................................................... 15 
5.9. 
Enhanced Due Diligence (EDD) Norms .................................................................. 15 
5.10. Sanctions screening for VDA transfers ................................................................. 17 
5.11. Counterparty Due Diligence ...................................................................................... 17 
5.12. Correspondent Relationship ..................................................................................... 18 
6. 
Reporting Obligations of Service Providers (SPs) .............................................. 19 
6.1. 
Reporting to Financial Intelligence Unit-India ...................................................... 19 
6.1.1. Suspicious Transactions Report (STR): ..................................................................... 19 
6.1.2. Reporting of receipts by Non-Profit Organizations: ................................................... 20 
6.1.3. Transaction Monitoring .................................................................................................. 21 
7. 
Prohibition of Tipping-off ........................................................................................... 21 
8. 
Sharing of Information: .............................................................................................. 21 
8.1. 
Record Retention under Section 12(3) of PMLA .................................................. 21 
9. 
Access to Information under Section 12A of PMLA ........................................... 22 
10. 
Risk Based Assessment ............................................................................................ 23 
11. 
Specific Obligations .................................................................................................... 25 
11.1. Initial Coin Offerings/ Initial Token Offerings (ICOs/ ITOs) ...................................... 25 
3 
 
11.2. Virtual Digital Asset Transfers ...................................................................................... 25 
11.3. Travel Rule ..................................................................................................................... 26 
Annexure I .................................................................................................................................. 29 
 
4 
 
Acronyms 
 
Term 
Definition 
AML 
Anti-Money Laundering 
CFT 
Countering the Financing of Terrorism 
CDD 
Customer Due Diligence 
CPF 
Combating Proliferation Financing 
CKYCR 
Central Know Your Customer Registry 
CRS 
Common Reporting Standards 
DApp 
Decentralised or Distributed Application 
DeFi 
Decentralised Finance 
DNFBP 
Designated Non-Financial Business and Profession 
EDD 
Enhanced Due Diligence 
FATF 
Financial Action Task Force 
FI 
Financial Institution (traditional financial institutions not defined as SPs) 
FIU-IND 
Financial Intelligence Unit – India 
ICO / ITO 
Initial Coin Offering / Initial Token Offering 
Intermediary 
Service Provider 
Refers to a Service Provider (SP) in a serial chain that receives and re-
transmits a VDA transfer on behalf of the Originator SP and the Beneficiary 
SP or another intermediary SP. 
KYC 
Know Your Customer 
ML/TF/PF 
Money Laundering, Terrorism Financing and Proliferation Financing 
NFT 
Non-Fungible Token 
NRA 
National Risk Assessment 
5 
 
OFAC 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (US) 
OTC 
Over-the-Counter 
OVD 
Officially Valid Document 
P2P 
Peer-to-Peer 
PEPs 
Politically Exposed Persons  
PMLA 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002 
PMLR 
Prevention of Money-laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules 2005 
RBA 
Risk-Based Approach 
RE 
Reporting Entities 
SP 
Service Provider providing services relating to Virtual Digital Assets 
STR 
Suspicious Transaction Reporting 
UAPA 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 
UNSC 
United Nations Security Council 
VDA 
Virtual Digital Assets 
VC 
Virtual Currencies 
Wallet 
Software or hardware that enables users to store and use Virtual Digital 
Assets. If hosted on an exchange or connected to the Internet, the same 
are referred to as Hot Wallets while offline wallets are referred to as Cold 
Wallets. 
 
 
 
6 
 
Introduction  
1. Background 
 
1.1 
The Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 (‘PMLA’) forms the core of the 
legal framework put in place by India to combat Money Laundering. For the purpose 
of these guidelines, Money Laundering is defined in terms of Rule 3 of PMLA.   
PMLA envisages certain record-keeping and reporting obligations for financial 
institutions and persons carrying on designated business or profession. Persons 
carrying on designated business or profession are defined in Clause (s) of sub-section 
(1) of Section 2 of the PMLA. Sub-clause (vi) of the said clause includes within the 
ambit of ‘person carrying on designated business or profession’ persons carrying on 
such other activities as the Central Government may, by notification, designate from 
time-to-time. 
1.2 
These guidelines shall be called AML & CFT Guidelines for Reporting Entities 
Providing Services Related To Virtual Digital Assets (hereinafter called “The 
Guidelines”) and  aim to provide a summary of the provisions of the applicable anti-
money laundering, counter-terrorism financing and proliferation financing legislations 
in India, viz. the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as 
the “PMLA”), the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as 
the “UAPA”), The Weapons of Mass Destruction and Delivery Systems  (Prohibition of 
Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the “WMDA”) and rules 
thereunder and their applicability to and implications for the providers of services 
related to Virtual Digital Assets hereinafter referred to as Service Providers (SPs) and 
their role in applying Anti-Money Laundering, Countering the Financing of Terrorism 
and Combating Proliferation Financing (AML/CFT/CPF) obligations. 
a. These guidelines are intended to set out the steps that a SP shall implement to 
discourage and to identify any money laundering, terrorist financing or 
proliferation financing activities. It prescribes the procedures and obligations to 
be followed by the reporting entities to ensure compliance with AML/CFT/CPF 
guidelines. 
 
b. The strategy would be to use deterrence (implementation of effective KYC, 
CDD and EDD measures), detection (e.g., monitoring and suspicious 
7 
 
transaction reporting), and record-keeping so as to facilitate investigations by 
the appropriate authorities wherever required. 
 
1.3 
Service Providers 
The Central Government vide notification F.No. P-12011/12/2022-ES Cell-DOR dated 
March 07, 2023, has notified the following activities, when carried out for or on behalf 
of another natural or legal person in the course of business as an activity for the 
purposes of sub-clause (vi) of clause (sa) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the 
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003): 
(i) 
exchange between virtual digital assets and fiat currencies; 
(ii) 
exchange between one or more forms of virtual digital assets; 
(iii) 
transfer of virtual digital assets; 
(iv) 
safekeeping or administration of virtual digital assets or instruments 
enabling control over virtual digital assets; and 
(v) 
participation in and provision of financial services related to an issuer’s offer 
and sale of a virtual digital asset. 
Explanation:- For the purposes of these guidelines ‘virtual digital asset’ shall have 
the same meaning assigned to it in clause (47A) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act 
1961 (43 of 1961). 
2. Purpose of the guidelines 
The purpose of these guidelines is to  
a. Understand and apply the risk-based approach and indicate best practices in 
the design and implementation of an effective risk-based approach. 
b. Identify the entities that conduct activities or operations relating to VDAs i.e., 
SPs. 
c. Establish an efficient reporting mechanism to prevent money laundering, 
terrorist financing and proliferation financing.  
d. To assist entities engaged in or seeking to engage in VDA activities or 
operations to better understand their AML/CFT/CPF obligations and how they 
can effectively comply with the AML/CFT/CPF requirements as notified under 
PMLA/PMLR. 
8 
 
3. Scope  
a. The guidelines apply to SPs and explain how they should implement the 
AML/CFT/CPF obligations effectively.  
b. Further, the guidelines focus on VDAs that are convertible to other funds or 
value, including both VDAs that are convertible to other VDAs and VDAs that 
are convertible to fiat or that intersect with the fiat financial system.  
c. Central Bank issued Digital Currencies (CBDCs) are outside the scope of this 
guidance since they are digital representation of fiat currencies.  
4. Effective Date 
These guidelines shall take effect immediately i.e. from 10th March 2023. 
The guidelines would be subject to regular amendments or updates with a view to 
reflect changes at the level of the domestic and international regulatory landscape, 
including the market dynamics of the VDA sector, in or from India. 
5. General Obligations of Service Providers (SPs) 
5.1. 
Registration of SPs as Reporting Entities with FIU-IND  
In terms of Rule 2 (wa) read with Rule 2 (sa) of PMLA, all SPs are required to register 
as Reporting Entities with FIU-IND. As part of RE registration, SPs must disclose their 
account details with Banks/FIs where they hold accounts for transactions as well as 
for holding of Client Money.  
5.2. 
Policies and Procedures to Combat Money Laundering, Counter Terrorist 
Financing and Combat Proliferation Financing: (AML/CFT/CPF Program) 
In order to combat the menace of money-laundering, terror financing, proliferation 
financing and other related serious crimes, Rule 7(3) of the PMLR casts an obligation 
on every reporting entity to evolve an internal mechanism in respect of these 
guidelines to detect transactions as specified under Rule 3(1) and furnishing 
information about such transactions to FIU-IND. 
The obligation of reporting entities to effectively serve to prevent and impede money 
laundering and terrorist financing and to observe such internal controls not only by 
them but also by their Designated Director, officers and employees is a legal 
requirement under Rule 7(4) of the PMLR. 
9 
 
In order to discharge the statutory responsibility to detect possible attempts of money 
laundering, financing of terrorism or proliferation financing, every SP must have a 
robust AML/CFT/CPF program in place.  
The AML/CFT/ CPF program must include the following points. 
5.3. 
Internal policies, procedures, and controls signed off by the Board and 
Senior Management 
5.3.1 To comply with the obligations of Reporting Entities as specified under PMLA, 
PMLR, every reporting entity shall establish appropriate policies and procedures for 
the prevention of ML, TF, and PF, and ensure their effectiveness and compliance with 
all relevant legal and regulatory requirements. The reporting entities shall:  
5.3.2 Issue a statement of policies and procedures for dealing with ML, TF and PF 
risks, reflecting the current statutory and regulatory requirements;  
5.3.3 Ensure that the spirit of these guidelines and internal policies and procedures 
are understood by all staff members;  
5.3.4 Regularly review the policies and procedures on the prevention of ML, TF, and 
PF to ensure their effectiveness. To ensure the effectiveness of policies and 
procedures, the person carrying out such a review shall, as far as possible, be different 
from the one who has framed them;  
5.3.5 Adopt client acceptance policies and procedures and undertake Client Due 
Diligence (CDD) measures to the extent that is sensitive to the risk of ML, TF and PF 
depending on the type of client, business relationship or transaction; 
5.3.6 Further, in terms of Rule (3A) of PMLR with regard to implementation of policies 
by groups (as per rule 2(1)(cba) of PMLR “group" shall have the same meaning 
assigned to it in clause (e) of sub-section (9) of section 286 of the Income-tax Act, 
1961), Groups are required to implement group-wide policies for the purpose of 
discharging obligations under the provisions of Chapter IV of the PMLA. 
5.4. 
Appointment of a Designated Director and a Principal Officer 
5.4.1 Appointment: 
a. A “Designated Director” (as defined under the PMLR as amended from time to 
time) to ensure overall implementation of the obligations imposed under 
chapter IV of the Act and the Rules shall be appointed. 
10 
 
b. A Principal Officer (PO) at a senior level and preferably not below the level of 
Head (Audit/Compliance)/Chief Risk Officer shall be appointed to ensure 
compliance with the obligations imposed under chapter IV of the Act and the 
Rules. 
The Principal Officer and the Designated Director should be separate individuals. The 
contact details of the Designated Director and the Principal Officer for AML/CFT/CPF 
obligations shall be communicated to FIU-IND within 7 (seven) days of 
appointment/changes. 
5.4.2 Roles and Responsibilities of Designated Director and the Principal 
Officer 
The Designated Director and the Principal Officer shall be responsible for the following 
obligations to combat money laundering/ countering the financing of terrorism/ combat 
proliferation financing: 
5.4.2.1 
Furnishing of the information under Rule 8 (1) of the PMLR, as 
prescribed under sub rule (1) of Rule 3 of the said rules every month, by 15th day of 
the succeeding month, in prescribed format to the Director, FIU-IND. However, the 
information in respect of a suspicious transaction shall be furnished not later than 
seven working days on being satisfied that the transaction is suspicious as per Rule 
8(2) of the PMLR. Such information shall include any attempted transactions, whether 
or not made in cash; 
5.4.2.2 
Evolving an internal mechanism with regard to any directions/ guidelines 
issued by the Director, FIU-IND and for furnishing information as prescribed under sub 
rule (1) of Rule 3 of the PMLR; 
5.4.2.3 
Communication of group policies relating to prevention of ML,TF and PF 
to all management and relevant staff that handle account information, money and 
client records, etc. within their organisation; 
5.4.2.4 
Client acceptance policy and client due diligence measures, including 
requirements for proper identification, such as: 
• 
Maintenance of records; 
• 
Compliance with relevant statutory and regulatory requirements; 
• 
Cooperation with the relevant law enforcement authorities, including the 
timely disclosure of information; 
11 
 
• 
Role of internal audit or compliance function to ensure compliance with the 
policies, procedures and controls relating to the prevention of ML, TF and 
PF, including detection of suspected money laundering transactions 
5.5. 
Training 
Appropriate training to be provided to employees (compliance and others) based on 
their job profile. 
• 
SPs should have adequate screening procedures when hiring employees. 
• 
Instruction manuals on the procedures for client on boarding, KYC, CDD, 
Sanctions screening, customer identification, record-keeping and transaction 
processing and review should be set out. 
• 
Training requirements must be customised to specific roles. 
5.6. 
Internal Control/Audit 
The internal audit/ inspection departments should verify on a regular basis, compliance 
with policies, procedures and controls relating to money laundering activities. The 
reports should specifically comment on the robustness of the internal policies and 
processes in this regard and make constructive suggestions where necessary, to 
strengthen the policy and implementation aspects. 
Special attention should be paid to business relationships and transactions, especially 
those which do not have apparent economic or visible lawful purpose. In all such 
cases, the background and purpose of such transactions will as far as possible, have 
to be examined and written findings maintained for assisting competent authorities. 
5.7. 
Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms 
Keeping in view the anonymous and instantaneous nature of VDA transfers and the 
potential of services offered by SPs being misused by state and non-state actors for 
the purpose of money laundering, terror financing and proliferation financing, all SPs 
must have a robust mechanism in place for complying with KYC requirements prior to 
on boarding of clients/ wallets as well as for carrying out re-KYC of existing customers.  
a. Effective procedures should be put in place to obtain requisite details for proper 
identification of new customers as well as existing customers (if such details 
12 
 
are not already in place). Special care has to be exercised to ensure that the 
wallets are not opened under anonymous, pseudonymous, or fictitious names. 
b. SPs to take steps to identify the beneficial owner and take all reasonable 
measures to verify the identity to their satisfaction so as to establish the 
beneficial ownership. For the purpose of these guidelines, Beneficial 
Ownership shall be determined as defined in Rule 9(3) of PMLR, and detailed 
in Annexure I. 
I. 
‘Beneficial owner’ for this purpose means ‘an individual who ultimately owns the 
wallet or controls a customer of the SP or the person on whose behalf a transaction is 
being conducted and includes a person who exercises ultimate effective control over 
a legal person. 
II. 
 For the purpose of KYC, the Permanent Account Number (PAN) as applicable 
to residents or National Identity Number and any of the Officially Valid Document 
(OVD) as prescribed below can be used as a measure of identification  
• The passport,  
• The driving license,  
• Proof of possession of Aadhaar number,  
• The Voter's Identity Card issued by the Election Commission of India,  
• Job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an officer of the State Government 
and  
• Letter issued by the National Population Register containing details of name 
and address.  
Provided that, 
a. Where the customer submits his proof of possession of Aadhaar number as an 
OVD, he may submit it in such form as issued by the Unique Identification 
Authority of India (UIDAI). 
b. Where the OVD furnished by the customer does not have the updated address, 
the following documents or the equivalent e-documents thereof shall be 
deemed to be OVDs for the limited purpose of proof of address:- 
o Utility bill which is not more than two months old of any service provider 
(electricity, telephone, post-paid mobile phone, piped gas, water bill); 
o Property or Municipal tax receipt; 
13 
 
o Pension or family pension payment orders (PPOs) issued to retired 
employees by Government Departments or Public Sector Undertakings, 
if they contain the address; 
o Letter of allotment of accommodation from employer issued by State 
Government or Central Government Departments, statutory or 
regulatory bodies, public sector undertakings, scheduled commercial 
banks, financial institutions and listed companies and leave and licence 
agreements with such employers allotting official accommodation; 
c. The customer shall submit OVD with current address within a period of three 
months of submitting the documents specified at ‘b’ above 
d. Where the OVD presented by a foreign national does not contain the details of 
address, in such case the documents issued by the Government departments 
of foreign jurisdictions and letter issued by the Foreign Embassy or Mission in 
India shall be accepted as proof of address. 
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, a document shall be deemed to 
be an OVD even if there is a change in the name subsequent to its issuance 
provided it is supported by a marriage certificate issued by the State 
Government or Gazette notification, indicating such a change of name. 
e. An additional requirement for service providers involved in VDA transactions is 
to report transactions in Form 26QF (Quarterly statement of tax deposited in 
relation to transfer of virtual digital asset to be furnished by intermediaries) of 
the Income tax department, as per provisions of Section 194S of Income Tax 
Act, 1961.  This form captures data points such as name and PAN of the buyer 
and broker (for both transactions in which TDS was deducted, and transactions 
in which TDS was not deducted), value and number of VDA transferred, and 
date of transaction. 
f. SPs are required to comply with the relevant record keeping and reporting 
requirements under Information Technology Act and Income Tax Act in addition 
to record keeping and reporting requirements under PMLR.  
The officially valid documents (OVDs) must be verified by the SP at the time of 
accepting the risk for compliance with KYC requirement for individuals. No further 
documentation is necessary for proof of residence where the document of identity 
submitted also gives the proof of residence. It is mandatory to obtain any one of 
14 
 
the documents to clearly establish the customer identity in respect of all new 
wallets.  
III. 
 In cases where e-KYC services of the Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI) are availed for KYC verification (which is acceptable subject to specific and 
express consent of the customer to access his/her data through UIDAI system), 
certification requirements under this clause shall be deemed to be complied with. The 
e-KYC should be based on biometric (finger/iris) authentication as the primary mode 
with One Time Password (OTP) based authentication as a second factor. 
IV. 
 While implementing the KYC norms on legal persons, SPs will have to identify 
and verify their legal status through various documents, to be collected in support of 
• 
The name, legal form, proof of existence, 
• 
Powers that regulate and bind the juridical persons, 
• 
Address of the registered office/ main place of business 
• 
For the purpose of KYC for business entities, documents mentioned in the 
Customer Due Diligence (CDD) measures prescribed by Reserve Bank of 
India Master Direction - Know Your Customer (KYC) Direction, 2016 as 
updated from time to time, shall be used and maintained. 
V. 
 At any point in time during the period, where the SP is no longer satisfied about 
the true identity of the customer, a Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) should be 
filed with FIU-IND. 
 
5.7.1 When should KYC be done?  
KYC shall be done by SPs prior to on boarding of customers as well as a one-time 
exercise in cases where such KYC is not already present as on the date of issuance 
of these guidelines. SPs may rely on the identification and verification steps that they 
have already undertaken in case of a customer, unless they have doubts about the 
veracity of the information with them. 
Periodic KYC on existing customers may be done according to the RBA carried out by 
the SPs and at the very least every year owing to the high-risk nature of VDAs. 
 
15 
 
5.8. 
 Client Due Diligence (CDD) Norms 
5.8.1 SPs should maintain accurate and up-to-date customer information. 
5.8.2 SPs have the obligation to identify their customers and their beneficial owners, 
which is essential for the prevention of ML/TF/PF. 
5.8.3 In consonance with the basic principles of the KYC norms as prescribed in the 
PMLA or the rules made there under, all SPs shall frame their own internal 
directives based on their experience in dealing with their clients and legal 
requirements as per the established practices. 
5.8.4 In accordance with Rule 9 of the PMLR, each SP shall adopt written procedures 
to implement the anti-money laundering provisions as envisaged under the 
PMLA, related to the ‘Client Due Diligence Process’. 
5.8.5 SPs would be expected to make use of relevant software to: 
• 
Perform robust due diligence or KYC process on counterparty institutions; 
• 
Identify counterparty wallet type (pre-transaction); 
• 
Identify risk-related details about the beneficiary through Blockchain analytics 
and sanctions screening providers; 
• 
Allow to safely send or receive encrypted customer KYC information through 
various messaging protocols; 
• 
Store encrypted customer KYC information for up to five years; and 
• 
Allow to generate reports to FIU-IND on a timely basis, upon request. 
• 
All identification documents secured through the CDD measures should be 
retained by SPs for a period of at least five years as recommended under 
Chapter IV clause (3) of PMLA, 2002. 
• 
The extent of the ongoing CDD measures applied by SPs should be 
determined on a risk-sensitive basis. 
• 
However, SPs should be aware that as a business relationship develops, the 
associated ML/TF/PF risks may change. 
5.9. 
Enhanced Due Diligence (EDD) Norms 
SPs should examine, as far as reasonably possible, the background and purpose of 
all complex, unusually large transactions, and all unusual patterns of transactions, 
which have no apparent economic or lawful purpose. Where the risks of money 
laundering, terrorist financing or proliferation financing are higher, SPs should be 
16 
 
required to conduct enhanced due diligence, consistent with the risks identified. In 
particular, they should increase the degree and nature of monitoring of the business 
relationship, in order to determine whether those transactions or activities appear 
unusual or suspicious. 
5.9.1 Conducting enhanced due diligence should not be limited to merely 
documenting income proofs. It would mean having measures and procedures 
which are more rigorous and robust than normal KYC. These measures should 
be commensurate with the risk. While not intended to be exhaustive, the 
following are some of the reasonable measures in carrying out enhanced due 
diligence: 
• 
More frequent review of the customers’ profile/ transactions 
• 
Application of additional measures like gathering information from publicly 
available sources or otherwise 
• 
Reasonable measures to know the customer’s source of funds 
commensurate with the assessed risk of customer and product profile 
which may include: 
o Conducting independent enquiries on the details collected on 
/provided by the customer where required, 
o Consulting a credible database, public or other, etc., 
5.9.2 EDD with respect to high-risk jurisdictions/ persons/ entities 
Due to the potential for increased anonymity or obfuscation of VDA financial flows and 
the challenges associated with conducting effective supervision and CDD, including 
customer identification and verification, VDA activities are automatically regarded as 
posing higher ML/TF/PF risks that may potentially require the application of monitoring 
and EDD measures, where appropriate. 
a. SPs may be required to apply EDD measures to business relationships and 
transactions with natural and legal persons from higher risk jurisdictions 
specifically with countries designated as tax-havens and those on the FATF 
grey and black lists. 
SPs must implement EDD procedures when entering into business relationships 
with Politically Exposed Persons (“PEPs”). For the purposes of these guidelines 
‘PEP’ shall have the same meaning assigned to it as per rule 2(1) (db) of PMLR. 
17 
 
 
b. In cases where an SP is not able to undertake the required EDD, the SP shall 
terminate the business relationship and file a suspicious transaction report 
(STR). 
5.10. Sanctions screening for VDA transfers 
For the purpose of enhanced monitoring, sanctions screening should be carried out 
both at the time of on boarding as well as when any VDA transfer is initiated. 
SPs must ensure prompt application of the directives when issued by the competent 
authorities for implementing United Nations Security Council Resolutions relating to 
the suppression and combating of terrorism, terrorist financing and proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction and its financing, and other related directives, as well as 
compliance with all other applicable laws, regulatory requirements and guidelines in 
relation to economic sanctions. SPs must also ensure prompt application of the 
directives when issued by the competent authorities relating to the individuals 
designated as ‘terrorist’ under Section 35(1)(a) of the UAPA, 1967 and directives when 
issued by the competent authorities under WMDA. 
 
Since VDA transfers can currently be completed even without verification of sanctions 
screening, SPs may put in place the following safeguards.  
a. Putting a wallet on hold until screening is completed and confirmed that no 
concern is raised. 
b. Arranging to receive a VDA transfer with a provider’s wallet that links to a 
customer’s wallet and moving the transferred VDA to their customer’s wallet 
only after the screening is completed and has confirmed that no concern is 
raised.  
5.11. Counterparty Due Diligence 
This would be applicable to VDA transfers from a customer holding a wallet with an 
SP or using its services to transfer VDAs to a wallet hosted by another SP. In this case 
the originating SP would need to carry out CDD on the counterparty SP before they 
transmit the required information to avoid dealing with illicit actors or sanctioned actors 
unknowingly.  
18 
 
Considering the concept of due diligence, SPs must refresh their counterparty due 
diligence information periodically and when faced with emergent risk in line with their 
defined RBA control structure stemming from suspicious transaction history or other 
information such as adverse media, published information about regulatory or criminal 
penalties.  
5.12. Correspondent Relationship 
A ‘correspondent relationship’ is the provision of VDA related services by one SP to 
another SP or FI. Like its banking sector equivalent, such a correspondent relationship 
is characterised by its on-going, repetitive nature. Such a relationship could also 
include, for example, one SP white-labelling its platform functionality to another SP 
and also providing nested services (providing accounts to smaller SPs for access to 
liquidity and trading pairs).  
It should be incumbent on SPs providing services to another SP or financial institution 
as part of a cross-border correspondent relationship to:  
5.12.1. 
Gather sufficient information about the other SP or FI with which it 
proposes to establish a correspondent relationship, to understand fully the nature of 
the other SP or financial institution’s business and its AML/CFT/CPF risk control 
framework, including: what types of customers the other SP or FI intends to provide 
services to through the correspondent relationship;  
5.12.2. 
Gather sufficient information and determine from publicly available 
sources the reputation of the other SP or FI, the quality of supervision it is subject to 
and whether it has been subject to an ML/TF/PF investigation or regulatory action;  
5.12.3. 
Assess the other SP’s or FI’s AML/CFT/CPF controls;  
5.12.4. 
Obtain approval from senior management before establishing new 
correspondent relationships; and  
5.12.5. 
With respect to accounts or custodial wallets able to be used directly by 
customers of the other SP or FI to transact business on the customer’s own behalf, be 
satisfied that the other SP or FI has conducted CDD on such customers and is able to 
provide relevant CDD information on request and transaction details pertaining to 
identified customer/s, to the extent permitted privacy and data protection regulations 
in both jurisdictions.  
19 
 
6. Reporting Obligations of Service Providers (SPs) 
The AML/CFT/CPF program envisages submission of reports on certain transactions 
to Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND) set up by the Government of India to 
coordinate and strengthen collection and sharing of financial intelligence through 
effective national, regional, and global network to combat money laundering and 
related crimes. FIU-IND is the central nodal agency responsible for receiving, 
processing, analysing, and disseminating information relating to suspect financial 
transactions.  
All SPs are required to, where they have reasonable grounds to suspect that funds 
are the proceeds of crime or are related to ML, TF and PF, report their suspicions 
promptly to FIU-IND.  
In addition, SPs may be required to report specific indicators that may be associated 
with VDA activity, such as device identifiers, IP addresses with associated time 
stamps, VDA wallet addresses, and transaction hashes.  
 
6.1. 
Reporting to Financial Intelligence Unit-India 
a. 
In terms of the PMLR, reporting entities are required to report information 
relating to cash and suspicious transactions to the Director, Financial 
Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND) at the following address: Director, FIU-IND, 
Financial Intelligence Unit-India, 6th Floor, Tower 2, Jeevan Bharati Building, 
Connaught Place, New Delhi-110001. Website: http://fiuindia.gov.in 
b. 
Format for reporting Transactions: The format for reporting transactions, 
including suspicious transactions made or attempted, as required under Rule 
7(2) of PMLR, would be as prescribed by FIU-IND. 
6.1.1. Suspicious Transactions Report (STR): 
Rule 8(2) read with Rule 3(1)(D) of the PMLR provides for prompt reporting of a 
suspicious transaction, which includes an attempted suspicious transaction, to the 
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU-IND), if a reporting entity suspects or has reasonable 
grounds to suspect that funds used by a client are the proceeds of a criminal activity, 
or are related to terrorist financing. As detailed in Rule 3(1) of PMLR, suspicious 
transactions shall be reported no later than seven working days from the date of 
forming of suspicion. 
20 
 
a. Suspicious activity monitoring program should be appropriate to the SP and 
the services it provides. Special attention should be paid to all complex, 
unusually large transactions and all unusual patterns which have no 
apparent economic or visible lawful purpose. Background of such 
transactions, including all documents/ office records/ memorandums 
pertaining to such transactions, as far as possible, should be examined by 
the Principal Officer for recording their findings.  
b. Nothing in these Regulations is intended to limit any function or power 
conferred on another body or authority under the AML/CFT/CPF laws. 
The STR reporting would be at multiple points as illustrated below, e.g., if an SP X is 
designated as an RE, then the STR reporting obligation would be on the following 
entities) 
i. The FI from where the funds flow into X, if the funding of a user wallet is done 
through NEFT/RTGS/IMPS. 
ii. The SP X, when the funds are moved on the exchange hot wallet for purchase of 
VDAs for further purchase of VDAs. E.g., X purchasing VDA from SP Y via an 
escrow account for a customer and then crediting the VDA to the customer hot 
wallet. 
iii. X in cases where P2P transfer is done between customers of X since KYC data 
of both customers would be available with X. 
iv. X in cases where P2P transfer is done between a customer of X and an unhosted 
wallet since KYC data of the customer holding a hosted wallet at X would be 
available with X along with the beneficiary wallet details of the beneficiary used at 
the time of VDA transfer. 
6.1.2. Reporting of receipts by Non-Profit Organizations: 
All transactions, involving receipts by non-profit organizations (i.e., wallets directly 
owned by NGOs/ NPOs or by persons known to be affiliated to them) of value more 
than ₹10,00,000/- or its equivalent in foreign currency, should be reported to FIU-
IND. For the purposes of these guidelines ‘non-profit organisation’ shall have the 
same meaning assigned to it as per rule 2(1) (cf) of PMLR. 
As prescribed under Rule 2(9A) of PMLR, every SP shall register the details of 
NPO accounts/ wallets held by it on the DARPAN Portal of NITI Aayog, if not 
21 
 
already registered, and maintain such registration records for a period of five years 
after the business relationship has ended or the account has been closed, 
whichever is later. 
6.1.3. Transaction Monitoring 
SPs would be required to monitor the transactions going through their systems 
(intermediary SPs and where at least one wallet (originator or beneficiary) is hosted 
by them.  
SPs are required to develop, implement, and maintain effective transactional 
monitoring systems to determine the origin of a VDA and to monitor its destination, 
and to apply strong KYC measures that enable detection of possible ML/TF activities. 
7. Prohibition of Tipping-off 
Reporting entities and their directors, officers, and employees (permanent and 
temporary) shall be prohibited from disclosing (“tipping off”) that an STR or related 
information is being reported or provided to the FIU-IND. This prohibition on tipping off 
extends not only to the filing of the STR and/ or related information but even before, 
during and after the submission of an STR. Thus, it shall be ensured that there is no 
tipping off to the client at any level. It is clarified that the reporting entities, irrespective 
of the amount of transaction and/or the threshold limit envisaged for reporting under 
PMLA, shall file an STR if they have reasonable grounds to believe that the 
transactions involve proceeds of crime. 
8. Sharing of Information: 
Sharing of information on customers as defined under Rule 66 of PMLA would be 
applicable.  
8.1. 
Record Retention under Section 12(3) of PMLA 
SPs are required to retain records as defined in Sections 12(1)(a) and 12(1)(e)of 
PMLA and for a period of five years after the business relationship between a client 
and the reporting entity has ended or the account has been closed, whichever is later 
as mentioned in Section 12(3) of PMLA , in order to ensure that such documents are 
not destroyed. 
 
22 
 
9. Access to Information under Section 12A of PMLA  
Section 12A reads as under – 
(1) The Director may call for from any SP, any of the records referred to in Section 
11A, sub-section (1) of Section 12 and any additional information as he considers 
necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every SP shall furnish to the Director such information as may be required by 
him under sub-section (1) within such time and in such manner as he may specify. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided under any law for the time being in force, every 
information sought by the Director under sub-section (1), shall be kept confidential. 
9.1 The SPs must ensure that technology, systems, and measures are in place to 
safeguard the privacy of the data maintained and to prevent unauthorized access, 
alteration, destruction, disclosure or dissemination of records and data 
9.2 The physical or electronic access to the premises, facilities, automatic data 
processing systems, data storage sites and facilities including back-up sites and 
facilities and to the electronic data communication network of the service provider 
is controlled, monitored, and recorded; 
9.3 The SP must establish standard transmission and encryption formats and non-
repudiation safeguards for electronic communication of data. 
9.4 The SP must implement specific procedures for retaining internal records of 
transactions both domestic or international, to enable them to comply swiftly with 
information requests from the competent authorities. Such records must be 
sufficient to permit reconstruction of individual transactions (including the amounts 
and types of VDA/ fiat currency involved (if any) so as to provide, if necessary, 
evidence for prosecution of criminal activity.  
9.5 Where the records relate to ongoing investigations, or transactions which have 
been the subject of a disclosure, they should be retained until it is confirmed that 
the case has been closed where practicable, SPs are required to seek and retain 
relevant identification documents for all such transactions and to report such 
transactions of suspicious funds. 
9.6 In case of customer identification data obtained through the customer due diligence 
process, account files and business correspondence should be retained for at least 
five years after the business relationship is ended or the account has been closed, 
whichever is later. 
23 
 
10. Risk Based Assessment  
Risk assessments must be designed and implemented to assist SPs to better 
understand their risk exposure and areas in which they should prioritise allocation of 
resources for appropriate control and oversight of their AML/CFT/CPF activities. SPs 
shall carry out risk assessment to identify, assess and take effective measures to 
mitigate its money laundering and terrorist financing risk, severally and together, for 
customers, countries or geographic areas, and products, services, transactions or 
delivery channels that are consistent with the national risk assessment duly notified by 
the Central Government.  
A key component of their RBAs will entail that they should: 
10.1 Identify areas where their products/services could be exposed to ML/TF/PF 
risks e.g. 
a. Virtual 
Digital 
Assets 
[in 
particular, 
Anonymity-Enhanced 
Crypto 
currencies]; 
b. Virtual Digital Asset related products or services [in particular, methods in 
which Anonymity Enhanced Transactions can be conducted];  
c. Virtual Digital Assets related business and professional practices; and  
d. Technologies associated with VDA Activities. 
e. Customers carrying out extremely complex or high value transactions. 
f. Customers carrying out transactions with known high-risk jurisdictions. 
10.2 Take appropriate steps to ensure that any identified risks are managed and 
mitigated through the establishment of appropriate and effective policies, procedures, 
and controls. 
10.3 The risk assessment shall be documented and be kept up-to-date. The SP shall 
consider all the relevant risk factors before determining the level of overall risk and the 
appropriate level and type of mitigation to be applied. It shall be made available to 
competent authorities and self-regulating bodies, as and when required. 
10.4 SPs should carry out an effective RBA and not resort to wholesale termination 
or exclusion of business relationships within their sector or operations, without an 
appropriately targeted risk assessment. 
10.5 Risk Assessments should be subject to regular review and updation to ensure 
an effective system for remedying any identified deficiencies. 
24 
 
10.6 A risk assessment should typically consider all of the risk factors that the SP 
considers relevant, including the types of services, products, transactions, or 
technologies involved; customer risks; geographical factors; types of VDAs traded, 
among other factors. 
a. SPs must, inter alia, identify, assess, understand, and monitor ML/TF risks for 
its customers. 
b. SPs shall also consider the findings of the National Risk Assessment for 
appropriate Direction in the adoption of its business risk assessment. 
10.7 Certain clients may be of a higher or lower risk category depending on the 
client’s background, type of business relationship or transaction, etc. In order to 
identify the types of clients that are likely to pose a higher-than-average risk of ML, TF 
or PF, the SP shall develop appropriate client acceptance policies and procedures.  
10.8 The risk assessment shall be documented and shall be made available to the 
Director, FIU-IND, as and when required. The following safeguards are to be followed 
while accepting the clients:  
a. No reporting entity shall allow the opening of or keep any anonymous account 
or account in fictitious names or accounts on behalf of other persons whose 
identity has not been disclosed or cannot be verified. 
b. The clients should be categorised in two categories, viz. high risk and low risk. 
c. Factors of risk perception for monitoring suspicious transactions of the clients 
are clearly defined having regard to clients’ location, nature of business activity, 
trading turnover etc. and manner of making payment for transactions 
undertaken.  
10.9 A risk assessment of clients who are non-residents, high net worth individuals, 
trusts, charities, NGOs, and organisations receiving donations, companies having 
close family shareholding or beneficial ownership, firms with sleeping partners etc. will 
determine their ML/TF/PF risk. 
10.10 In cases where the appropriate CDD measures to identify the profile of a client 
cannot be applied or it is not possible to ascertain the identity of the client, or the 
information provided by the client is suspected to be false or non–genuine, the SP 
shall not enter into a transaction with such client. In such cases, a suspicious activity 
report shall be filed with FIU-IND. 
10.11 In cases, where the identity of a client is ascertained as having a criminal 
background, a suspicious transaction report shall be filed with FIU-IND. 
25 
 
11. Specific Obligations 
11.1. Initial Coin Offerings/ Initial Token Offerings (ICOs/ ITOs) 
ICOs are generally a means to raise funds for new projects from early backers and 
function similar to IPOs for stock offerings.  Persons offering services relating to 
issuance, offer, book building, underwriting, market making and placement agent 
activity, sale, distribution, ongoing market circulation and trading of a VDA would be 
considered as SPs 
The use of an automated process such as a smart contract to carry out SP functions 
does not relieve the parties of responsibility for SP obligations. In such instances, 
controlling parties (responsible for the execution of the contracts) qualifying as SPs 
should undertake ML/TF/PF risk assessments prior to the launch or use of the platform 
and take appropriate measures to mitigate risks. 
11.2. Virtual Digital Asset Transfers 
All transactions related to transfer, exchange of VDAs for VDAs or fiat currencies 
would be construed to be on the lines of wire transfers since the same is defined as 
any transaction carried out on behalf of an originator through a FI by electronic means 
with a view to making an amount of funds available to a beneficiary person at a 
beneficiary FI, irrespective of whether the originator and the beneficiary are the same 
person.  
Parties to a wire transfer for this purpose would mean (a) parties to a traditional wire 
transfer, (b) a VDA transfer between a SP and another obliged entity (e.g., between 
two SPs or between a SP and another obliged entity, such as a bank or other FI)  
Exception: Transaction Fees, Blockchain rewards or Gas Fees are exempt from the 
definition of Wire Transfer and the travel rule since the recipient is not the originator 
or recipient of the VDA transfer itself. 
11.2.1. 
VDA transfers to/from ‘intermediary SPs’ 
For VDA transfer to/ from intermediary SPs or FIs that facilitate VDA transfers as an 
intermediate element in a chain of VDA transfers, it is suggested that they may be 
treated as obliged entities and may be required to treat all VDA transfers as cross-
border qualifying transfers.  
 
26 
 
Just as a traditional intermediary FI processing a traditional fiat cross-border wire 
transfer must ensure that all required originator and beneficiary information that 
accompanies a wire transfer is retained with it, so too must an intermediary SP or other 
comparable intermediary institution that facilitates VDA transfers ensure that the 
required information is transmitted along the chain of VDA transfers, as well as 
maintaining necessary records and making the information available to appropriate 
authorities upon request.  
Similarly, where technical limitations prevent the required originator or beneficiary 
information from remaining with a required data submission, a record should be kept, 
for at least five years, by the receiving intermediary SP of all the information received 
from the ordering SP or another intermediary SP. Intermediary institutions involved in 
VDA transfers also have general obligations to identify suspicious transactions, take 
freezing actions, and prohibit transactions with designated persons and entities—just 
like ordering and beneficiary SPs (or other ordering or beneficiary obliged entities that 
facilitate VDA transfers). 
11.2.2. 
VDA transfers to/from unhosted wallets 
VDA transfers to / from unhosted wallets are categorised as high risk since either the 
originating or beneficiary wallet may not be hosted at an SP that is an obliged entity. 
This also covers P2P transfers where one of the wallets is not hosted. 
In case where the VDA transfer is between two wallets where at least one of them is 
a hosted wallet, the onus of compliance would be on the obliged entity where the wallet 
is hosted. 
In addition, additional limitations or controls may be put in place on such transfers with 
unhosted wallets. 
11.3. Travel Rule 
In terms of Rule 12(1) (a) of PMLA, SPs should ensure to include required and 
accurate originator information, and required beneficiary information, on wire transfers 
and related messages. SPs should also monitor wire transfers to detect those which 
lack the required originator and/or beneficiary information and screen the transactions 
to comply with relevant UNSCR resolutions. 
The originating SPs must obtain and hold required and accurate originator information 
and required beneficiary information on VDA transfers, submit the above information 
to the beneficiary SP or financial institution (if any) immediately and securely, and 
27 
 
make it available on request to appropriate authorities. Beneficiary SPs must obtain 
and hold required originator information and accurate beneficiary information on VDA 
transfers and make it available on request to appropriate authorities. 
This applied regardless of whether the value of the VDA transfer is denominated in fiat 
currency or another VDA.  
The required information, which the ordering SP must obtain and hold, includes:  
a. Originator’s Permanent Account Number (PAN) or National Identity Number 
b. Originator’s name (i.e., the sending person’s accurate (i.e., verified) full name);  
b. Originator’s account number used to process the transaction. In the VDA 
context, this would mean the “wallet address” of the originator;  
c. Originator’s physical (geographical) address that uniquely identifies the 
originator to the ordering institution, or date and place of birth. Provided that 
such an address has been verified for accuracy by the originator SP as part of 
its KYC process. 
d. Beneficiary’s name (i.e., the name of the person who is identified by the 
originator as the receiver of the VDA transfer). This is not required to be verified 
by the ordering institution for accuracy, but should be reviewed for the purpose 
of STR monitoring and sanction screening; and  
e. Beneficiary account number used to process the transaction. In the VDA 
context, this could mean the “wallet address” of the beneficiary.  
 
The required information which the beneficiary SP must obtain from the originator 
SP and hold, includes:  
b. Originator’s Permanent Account Number (PAN) or National Identity Number 
c. Originator’s name (i.e., the sending person’s name). The beneficiary institution 
does not need to be verify the originator’s name for accuracy, but should review 
it for the purpose of STR monitoring and sanction screening. 
d. Originator’s account number used to process the transaction. In the VDA 
context, this could mean the “wallet address” of the originator.  
e. Originator’s physical (geographical) address that uniquely identifies the 
originator to the ordering institution, or date and place of birth.  
28 
 
f. Beneficiary’s name (i.e., the name of the person who is identified by the 
originator as the receiver of the VDA transfer). The beneficiary institution must 
verify the beneficiary’s name for accuracy, if the name of their customer has not 
been previously verified. Thus, the beneficiary institution can confirm if the 
beneficiary’s name and account number they obtain from the ordering institution 
match with the beneficiary institution’s verified customer data. 
g. Beneficiary’s account number used to process the transaction. In the VDA 
context, this could mean the “wallet address” of the beneficiary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
Annexure I  
 
Procedures for determination of Beneficial Ownership of VDA Wallet 
 
In order to have a uniform approach across the financial sector, the following 
procedures for determination of Beneficial Ownership as mentioned in Rule 9(3) of 
PMLR as amended from time to time are prescribed: 
a. 
Where the customer is a company, the beneficial owner is the natural person(s), 
who, whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical person, has a 
controlling ownership interest or who exercises control through other means. 
Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-clause- 
i. 
“Controlling ownership interest” means ownership of or entitlement to more than ten 
percent of shares or capital or profits of the company; 
ii. 
“Control” shall include the right to appoint majority of the directors or to control the 
management or policy decisions including by virtue of their shareholding or 
management rights or shareholders agreements or voting agreements; 
b. Where the customer is a partnership firm, the beneficial owner is the natural 
person(s), who, whether acting alone or together, or through one or more juridical 
person, has ownership of/entitlement to more than fifteen percent of capital or profits 
of the partnership; 
c. Where the client is an unincorporated association or body of individuals, the 
beneficial owner is the natural person(s), who, whether acting alone or together, or 
through one or more juridical person, has ownership of or entitlement to more than 
fifteen percent of the property or capital or profits of such association or body of 
individuals; 
d. Where no natural person is identified under (a) or (b) or (c) above, the beneficial 
owner is the relevant natural person who holds the position of senior managing official; 
e. Where the client is a trust, the identification of beneficial owner(s) shall include 
identification of the author of the trust, the trustee, the beneficiaries with ten percent 
or more interest in the trust and any other natural person exercising ultimate effective 
control over the trust through a chain of control or ownership; and 
f. Where the client or the owner of the controlling interest is a company listed on a 
stock exchange, or is a subsidiary of such a company, it is not necessary to identify 
30 
 
and verify the identity of any shareholder or beneficial owner of such companies, since 
it may be assumed that such due-diligence has been carried out at the time of listing 
on the exchange. 
 

 
 
Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision 
 
 
 
 
Customer due diligence 
for banks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 2001 
 
 
Working Group on Cross-border Banking 
Co-Chairs: 
Mr Charles Freeland, Deputy Secretary General, Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision 
Mr Colin Powell, Chairman, Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors, and Chairman, 
Jersey Financial Services Commission 
Bermuda Monetary Authority 
Mr D Munro Sutherland 
Cayman Islands Monetary Authority 
Mr John Bourbon 
Mrs Anna McLean 
Banque de France/Commission Bancaire 
Mr Laurent Ettori 
Federal Banking Supervisory Office of Germany 
Mr Jochen Sanio 
Mr Peter Kruschel 
Guernsey Financial Services Commission 
Mr Peter G Crook (until April 2001) 
Mr Philip Marr (since April 2001) 
Banca d’Italia 
Mr Giuseppe Godano 
Financial Services Agency, Japan 
Mr Kiyotaka Sasaki (until July 2001) 
Mr Hisashi Ono (since July 2001) 
Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier, 
Luxembourg 
Mr Romain Strock 
Monetary Authority of Singapore 
Mrs Foo-Yap Siew Hong 
Ms Teo Lay Har 
Swiss Federal Banking Commission 
Mr Daniel Zuberbühler 
Ms Dina Balleyguier 
Financial Services Authority, United Kingdom 
Mr Richard Chalmers 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
Mr William Ryback 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Ms Nancy Bercovici 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
Mr Jose Tuya 
Ms Tanya Smith 
Secretariat 
Mr Andrew Khoo 
 
 
1
 
Table of Contents 
I. 
Introduction...................................................................................................................2 
II. 
Importance of KYC standards for supervisors and banks..............................................3 
III. 
Essential elements of KYC standards ...........................................................................5 
1. 
Customer acceptance policy ................................................................................6 
2. 
Customer identification.........................................................................................6 
2.1  General identification requirements.............................................................7 
2.2 
Specific identification issues .......................................................................8 
2.2.1 Trust, nominee and fiduciary accounts...............................................8 
2.2.2 Corporate vehicles.............................................................................8 
2.2.3  Introduced business...........................................................................9 
2.2.4 Client accounts opened by professional intermediaries......................9 
2.2.5  Politically exposed persons..............................................................10 
2.2.6 Non-face-to-face customers.............................................................11 
2.2.7 Correspondent banking....................................................................12 
3. 
On-going monitoring of accounts and transactions.............................................13 
4.  
Risk management..............................................................................................14 
IV. 
The role of supervisors................................................................................................14 
V. 
Implementation of KYC standards in a cross-border context.......................................15 
Annex 1: Excerpts from Core Principles Methodology..........................................................18 
Annex 2: Excerpts from FATF recommendations .................................................................20 
 
 
 
2
 
Customer due diligence for banks 
I. 
Introduction 
1. 
Supervisors around the world are increasingly recognising the importance of 
ensuring that their banks have adequate controls and procedures in place so that they know 
the customers with whom they are dealing. Adequate due diligence on new and existing 
customers is a key part of these controls. Without this due diligence, banks can become 
subject to reputational, operational, legal and concentration risks, which can result in 
significant financial cost.  
2. 
In reviewing the findings of an internal survey of cross-border banking in 1999, the 
Basel Committee identified deficiencies in a large number of countries’ know-your-customer 
(KYC) policies for banks. Judged from a supervisory perspective, KYC policies in some 
countries have significant gaps and in others they are non-existent. Even among countries 
with well-developed financial markets, the extent of KYC robustness varies. Consequently, 
the Basel Committee asked the Working Group on Cross-border Banking1 to examine the 
KYC procedures currently in place and to draw up recommended standards applicable to 
banks in all countries. The resulting paper was issued as a consultative document in January 
2001. Following a review of the comments received, the Working Group has revised the 
paper and the Basel Committee is now distributing it worldwide in the expectation that the 
KYC framework presented here will become the benchmark for supervisors to establish 
national practices and for banks to design their own programmes. It is important to 
acknowledge that supervisory practices of some jurisdictions already meet or exceed the 
objective of this paper and, as a result, they may not need to implement any changes. 
3. 
KYC is most closely associated with the fight against money-laundering, which is 
essentially the province of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).2 It is not the Committee's 
intention to duplicate the efforts of the FATF. Instead, the Committee's interest is from a 
wider prudential perspective. Sound KYC policies and procedures are critical in protecting 
the safety and soundness of banks and the integrity of banking systems. The Basel 
Committee and the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors (OGBS) continue to support 
strongly the adoption and implementation of the FATF recommendations, particularly those 
relating to banks, and intend the standards in this paper to be consistent with the FATF 
recommendations. The Committee and the OGBS will also consider the adoption of any 
higher standards introduced by the FATF as a result of its current review of the 40 
Recommendations. Consequently, the Working Group has been and will remain in close 
contact with the FATF as it develops its thoughts. 
4. 
The Basel Committee’s approach to KYC is from a wider prudential, not just anti-
money laundering, perspective. Sound KYC procedures must be seen as a critical element in 
the effective management of banking risks. KYC safeguards go beyond simple account 
                                                
1  This is a joint group consisting of members of the Basel Committee and of the Offshore Group of Banking 
Supervisors. 
2  The FATF is an inter-governmental body which develops and promotes policies, both nationally and 
internationally, to combat money laundering. It has 29 member countries and two regional organisations. It 
works in close cooperation with other international bodies involved in this area such as the United Nations 
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention, the Council of Europe, the Asia-Pacific Group on Money 
Laundering and the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force. The FATF defines money laundering as the 
processing of criminal proceeds in order to disguise their illegal origin. 
 
 
3
 
opening and record-keeping and require banks to formulate a customer acceptance policy 
and a tiered customer identification programme that involves more extensive due diligence 
for higher risk accounts, and includes proactive account monitoring for suspicious activities. 
5. 
The Basel Committee’s interest in sound KYC standards originates from its 
concerns for market integrity and has been heightened by the direct and indirect losses 
incurred by banks due to their lack of diligence in applying appropriate procedures. These 
losses could probably have been avoided and damage to the banks’ reputation significantly 
diminished had the banks maintained effective KYC programmes.  
6. 
This paper reinforces the principles established in earlier Committee papers by 
providing more precise guidance on the essential elements of KYC standards and their 
implementation. In developing this guidance, the Working Group has drawn on practices in 
member countries and taken into account evolving supervisory developments. The essential 
elements presented in this paper are guidance as to minimum standards for worldwide 
implementation for all banks. These standards may need to be supplemented and/or 
strengthened, by additional measures tailored to the risks of particular institutions and risks in 
the banking system of individual countries. For example, enhanced diligence is required in 
the case of higher-risk accounts or for banks that specifically aim to attract high net-worth 
customers. In a number of specific sections in this paper, there are recommendations for 
higher standards of due diligence for higher risk areas within a bank, where applicable. 
7. 
The need for rigorous customer due diligence standards is not restricted to banks. 
The Basel Committee believes similar guidance needs to be developed for all non-bank 
financial institutions and professional intermediaries of financial services such as lawyers and 
accountants. 
II. 
Importance of KYC standards for supervisors and banks 
8. 
The FATF and other international groupings have worked intensively on KYC 
issues, and the FATF’s 40 Recommendations on combating money-laundering3 have 
international recognition and application. It is not the intention of this paper to duplicate that 
work.  
9. 
At the same time, sound KYC procedures have particular relevance to the safety 
and soundness of banks, in that:  

they help to protect banks’ reputation and the integrity of banking systems by 
reducing the likelihood of banks becoming a vehicle for or a victim of financial crime 
and suffering consequential reputational damage; 

they constitute an essential part of sound risk management (e.g. by providing the 
basis for identifying, limiting and controlling risk exposures in assets and liabilities, 
including assets under management).  
10. 
The inadequacy or absence of KYC standards can subject banks to serious 
customer and counterparty risks, especially reputational, operational, legal and 
concentration risks. It is worth noting that all these risks are interrelated. However, any one 
                                                
3  See FATF recommendations 10 to 19 which are reproduced in Annex 2. 
4 
 
of them can result in significant financial cost to banks (e.g. through the withdrawal of funds 
by depositors, the termination of inter-bank facilities, claims against the bank, investigation 
costs, asset seizures and freezes, and loan losses), as well as the need to divert 
considerable management time and energy to resolving problems that arise.  
11. 
Reputational risk poses a major threat to banks, since the nature of their business 
requires maintaining the confidence of depositors, creditors and the general marketplace. 
Reputational risk is defined as the potential that adverse publicity regarding a bank’s 
business practices and associations, whether accurate or not, will cause a loss of confidence 
in the integrity of the institution. Banks are especially vulnerable to reputational risk because 
they can so easily become a vehicle for or a victim of illegal activities perpetrated by their 
customers. They need to protect themselves by means of continuous vigilance through an 
effective KYC programme. Assets under management, or held on a fiduciary basis, can pose 
particular reputational dangers. 
12. 
Operational risk can be defined as the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from 
inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events. Most 
operational risk in the KYC context relates to weaknesses in the implementation of banks’ 
programmes, ineffective control procedures and failure to practise due diligence. A public 
perception that a bank is not able to manage its operational risk effectively can disrupt or 
adversely affect the business of the bank.  
13. 
Legal risk is the possibility that lawsuits, adverse judgements or contracts that turn 
out to be unenforceable can disrupt or adversely affect the operations or condition of a bank. 
Banks may become subject to lawsuits resulting from the failure to observe mandatory KYC 
standards or from the failure to practise due diligence. Consequently, banks can, for 
example, suffer fines, criminal liabilities and special penalties imposed by supervisors. 
Indeed, a court case involving a bank may have far greater cost implications for its business 
than just the legal costs. Banks will be unable to protect themselves effectively from such 
legal risks if they do not engage in due diligence in identifying their customers and 
understanding their business.  
14. 
Supervisory concern about concentration risk mostly applies on the assets side of 
the balance sheet. As a common practice, supervisors not only require banks to have 
information systems to identify credit concentrations but most also set prudential limits to 
restrict banks’ exposures to single borrowers or groups of related borrowers. Without 
knowing precisely who the customers are, and their relationship with other customers, it will 
not be possible for a bank to measure its concentration risk. This is particularly relevant in 
the context of related counterparties and connected lending. 
15. 
On the liabilities side, concentration risk is closely associated with funding risk, 
particularly the risk of early and sudden withdrawal of funds by large depositors, with 
potentially damaging consequences for the bank’s liquidity. Funding risk is more likely to be 
higher in the case of small banks and those that are less active in the wholesale markets 
than large banks. Analysing deposit concentrations requires banks to understand the 
characteristics of their depositors, including not only their identities but also the extent to 
which their actions may be linked with those of other depositors. It is essential that liabilities 
managers in small banks not only know but maintain a close relationship with large 
depositors, or they will run the risk of losing their funds at critical times.  
16. 
Customers frequently have multiple accounts with the same bank, but in offices 
located in different countries. To effectively manage the reputational, compliance and legal 
risk arising from such accounts, banks should be able to aggregate and monitor significant 
balances and activity in these accounts on a fully consolidated worldwide basis, regardless of 
 
 
5
 
whether the accounts are held on balance sheet, off balance sheet, as assets under 
management, or on a fiduciary basis. 
17. 
Both the Basel Committee and the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors are fully 
convinced that effective KYC practices should be part of the risk management and internal 
control systems in all banks worldwide. National supervisors are responsible for ensuring that 
banks have minimum standards and internal controls that allow them to adequately know 
their customers. Voluntary codes of conduct4 issued by industry organisations or 
associations can be of considerable value in underpinning regulatory guidance, by giving 
practical advice to banks on operational matters. However, such codes cannot be regarded 
as a substitute for formal regulatory guidance.   
III. 
Essential elements of KYC standards  
18. 
The Basel Committee’s guidance on KYC has been contained in the following three 
papers and they reflect the evolution of the supervisory thinking over time. The Prevention of 
Criminal Use of the Banking System for the Purpose of Money-Laundering issued in 1988 
stipulates the basic ethical principles and encourages banks to put in place effective 
procedures to identify customers, decline suspicious transactions and cooperate with law 
enforcement agencies. The 1997 Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision states, in 
a broader discussion of internal controls, that banks should have adequate policies, practices 
and procedures in place, including strict “know-your-customer” rules; specifically, supervisors 
should encourage the adoption of the relevant recommendations of the FATF. These relate 
to customer identification and record-keeping, increased diligence by financial institutions in 
detecting and reporting suspicious transactions, and measures to deal with countries with 
inadequate anti-money laundering measures. The 1999 Core Principles Methodology further 
elaborates the Core Principles by listing a number of essential and additional criteria. 
(Annex 1 sets out the relevant extracts from the Core Principles and the Methodology.) 
19. 
All banks should be required to “have in place adequate policies, practices and 
procedures that promote high ethical and professional standards and prevent the bank from 
being used, intentionally or unintentionally, by criminal elements”.5 Certain key elements 
should be included by banks in the design of KYC programmes. Such essential elements 
should start from the banks’ risk management and control procedures and should include (1) 
customer acceptance policy, (2) customer identification, (3) on-going monitoring of high risk 
accounts and (4) risk management. Banks should not only establish the identity of their 
customers, but should also monitor account activity to determine those transactions that do 
not conform with the normal or expected transactions for that customer or type of account. 
KYC should be a core feature of banks’ risk management and control procedures, and be 
complemented by regular compliance reviews and internal audit. The intensity of KYC 
programmes beyond these essential elements should be tailored to the degree of risk.  
                                                
4  An example of an industry code is the "Global anti-money-laundering guidelines for Private Banking" (also 
called the Wolfsberg Principles) that was drawn up in October 2000 by twelve major banks with significant 
involvement in private banking. 
5  Core Principles Methodology, Essential Criterion 1. 
6 
 
1. 
Customer acceptance policy 
20. 
Banks should develop clear customer acceptance policies and procedures, including 
a description of the types of customer that are likely to pose a higher than average risk to a 
bank. In preparing such policies, factors such as customers’ background, country of origin, 
public or high profile position, linked accounts, business activities or other risk indicators 
should be considered. Banks should develop graduated customer acceptance policies and 
procedures that require more extensive due diligence for higher risk customers. For example, 
the policies may require the most basic account-opening requirements for a working 
individual with a small account balance. It is important that the customer acceptance policy is 
not so restrictive that it results in a denial of access by the general public to banking services, 
especially for people who are financially or socially disadvantaged. On the other hand, quite 
extensive due diligence would be essential for an individual with a high net worth whose 
source of funds is unclear. Decisions to enter into business relationships with higher risk 
customers, such as politically exposed persons (see section 2.2.3 below), should be taken 
exclusively at senior management level. 
2. 
Customer identification 
21. 
Customer identification is an essential element of KYC standards. For the purposes 
of this paper, a customer includes: 

the person or entity that maintains an account with the bank or those on whose 
behalf an account is maintained (i.e. beneficial owners);  

the beneficiaries of transactions conducted by professional intermediaries; and  

any person or entity connected with a financial transaction who can pose a 
significant reputational or other risk to the bank.  
22. 
Banks should establish a systematic procedure for identifying new customers and 
should not establish a banking relationship until the identity of a new customer is 
satisfactorily verified.  
23. 
Banks should “document and enforce policies for identification of customers and 
those acting on their behalf”.6 The best documents for verifying the identity of customers are 
those most difficult to obtain illicitly and to counterfeit. Special attention should be exercised 
in the case of non-resident customers and in no case should a bank short-circuit identity 
procedures just because the new customer is unable to present himself for interview. The 
bank should always ask itself why the customer has chosen to open an account in a foreign 
jurisdiction. 
24. 
The customer identification process applies naturally at the outset of the 
relationship. To ensure that records remain up-to-date and relevant, there is a need for 
banks to undertake regular reviews of existing records.7 An appropriate time to do so is when 
a transaction of significance takes place, when customer documentation standards change 
substantially, or when there is a material change in the way that the account is operated. 
However, if a bank becomes aware at any time that it lacks sufficient information about an 
                                                
6  Core Principles Methodology, Essential Criterion 2. 
7  The application of new KYC standards to existing accounts is currently subject to FATF review. 
 
 
7
 
existing customer, it should take steps to ensure that all relevant information is obtained as 
quickly as possible. 
25. 
Banks that offer private banking services are particularly exposed to reputational 
risk, and should therefore apply enhanced due diligence to such operations. Private banking 
accounts, which by nature involve a large measure of confidentiality, can be opened in the 
name of an individual, a commercial business, a trust, an intermediary or a personalised 
investment company. In each case reputational risk may arise if the bank does not diligently 
follow established KYC procedures. All new clients and new accounts should be approved by 
at least one person, of appropriate seniority, other than the private banking relationship 
manager. If particular safeguards are put in place internally to protect confidentiality of 
private banking customers and their business, banks must still ensure that at least equivalent 
scrutiny and monitoring of these customers and their business can be conducted, e.g. they 
must be open to review by compliance officers and auditors.  
26. 
Banks should develop “clear standards on what records must be kept on customer 
identification and individual transactions and their retention period”.8 Such a practice is 
essential to permit a bank to monitor its relationship with the customer, to understand the 
customer’s on-going business and, if necessary, to provide evidence in the event of disputes, 
legal action, or a financial investigation that could lead to criminal prosecution. As the starting 
point and natural follow-up of the identification process, banks should obtain customer 
identification papers and retain copies of them for at least five years after an account is 
closed. They should also retain all financial transaction records for at least five years after 
the transaction has taken place.  
2.1  
General identification requirements 
27. 
Banks need to obtain all information necessary to establish to their full satisfaction 
the identity of each new customer and the purpose and intended nature of the business 
relationship. The extent and nature of the information depends on the type of applicant 
(personal, corporate, etc.) and the expected size of the account. National supervisors are 
encouraged to provide guidance to assist banks in designing their own identification 
procedures. The Working Group intends to develop essential elements of customer 
identification requirements. 
28. 
When an account has been opened, but problems of verification arise in the banking 
relationship which cannot be resolved, the bank should close the account and return the 
monies to the source from which they were received.9  
29. 
While the transfer of an opening balance from an account in the customer’s name in 
another bank subject to the same KYC standard may provide some comfort, banks should 
nevertheless consider the possibility that the previous account manager may have asked for 
the account to be removed because of a concern about dubious activities. Naturally, 
customers have the right to move their business from one bank to another. However, if a 
bank has any reason to believe that an applicant is being refused banking facilities by 
another bank, it should apply enhanced diligence procedures to the customer.  
                                                
8  Core Principles Methodology, Essential Criterion 2. 
9  Subject to any national legislation concerning handling of suspicious transactions. 
8 
 
30. 
Banks should never agree to open an account or conduct ongoing business with a 
customer who insists on anonymity or who gives a fictitious name. Nor should confidential 
numbered10 accounts function as anonymous accounts but they should be subject to exactly 
the same KYC procedures as all other customer accounts, even if the test is carried out by 
selected staff. Whereas a numbered account can offer additional protection for the identity of 
the account-holder, the identity must be known to a sufficient number of staff to operate 
proper due diligence. Such accounts should in no circumstances be used to hide the 
customer identity from a bank’s compliance function or from the supervisors.  
2.2 
Specific identification issues 
31. 
There are a number of more detailed issues relating to customer identification which 
need to be addressed. Several of these are currently under consideration by the FATF as 
part of a general review of its 40 recommendations, and the Working Group recognises the 
need to be consistent with the FATF.  
2.2.1 
Trust, nominee and fiduciary accounts  
32. 
Trust, nominee and fiduciary accounts can be used to circumvent customer 
identification procedures. While it may be legitimate under certain circumstances to provide 
an extra layer of security to protect the confidentiality of legitimate private banking 
customers, it is essential that the true relationship is understood. Banks should establish 
whether the customer is taking the name of another customer, acting as a "front", or acting 
on behalf of another person as trustee, nominee or other intermediary. If so, a necessary 
precondition is receipt of satisfactory evidence of the identity of any intermediaries, and of 
the persons upon whose behalf they are acting, as well as details of the nature of the trust or 
other arrangements in place. Specifically, the identification of a trust should include the 
trustees, settlors/grantors and beneficiaries.11  
2.2.2 
Corporate vehicles 
33. 
Banks need to be vigilant in preventing corporate business entities from being used 
by natural persons as a method of operating anonymous accounts. Personal asset holding 
vehicles, such as international business companies, may make proper identification of 
customers or beneficial owners difficult. A bank should understand the structure of the 
company, determine the source of funds, and identify the beneficial owners and those who 
have control over the funds. 
34. 
Special care needs to be exercised in initiating business transactions with 
companies that have nominee shareholders or shares in bearer form. Satisfactory evidence 
of the identity of beneficial owners of all such companies needs to be obtained. In the case of 
entities which have a significant proportion of capital in the form of bearer shares, extra 
vigilance is called for. A bank may be completely unaware that the bearer shares have 
changed hands. The onus is on banks to put in place satisfactory procedures to monitor the 
                                                
10 In a numbered account, the name of the beneficial owner is known to the bank but is substituted by an 
account number or code name in subsequent documentation. 
11  Beneficiaries should be identified as far as possible when defined. It is recognised that it may not be possible 
to identify the beneficiaries of trusts precisely at the outset. For example, some beneficiaries may be unborn 
children and some may be conditional on the occurrence of specific events. In addition, beneficiaries being 
specific classes of individuals (e.g. employee pension funds) may be appropriately dealt with as pooled 
accounts as referred to in paragraphs 38-9. 
 
 
9
 
identity of material beneficial owners. This may require the bank to immobilise the shares, 
e.g. by holding the bearer shares in custody. 
2.2.3  
Introduced business 
35. 
The performance of identification procedures can be time consuming and there is a 
natural desire to limit any inconvenience for new customers. In some countries, it has 
therefore become customary for banks to rely on the procedures undertaken by other banks 
or introducers when business is being referred. In doing so, banks risk placing excessive 
reliance on the due diligence procedures that they expect the introducers to have performed. 
Relying on due diligence conducted by an introducer, however reputable, does not in any 
way remove the ultimate responsibility of the recipient bank to know its customers and their 
business. In particular, banks should not rely on introducers that are subject to weaker 
standards than those governing the banks’ own KYC procedures or that are unwilling to 
share copies of due diligence documentation. 
36. 
The Basel Committee recommends that banks that use introducers should carefully 
assess whether the introducers are “fit and proper” and are exercising the necessary due 
diligence in accordance with the standards set out in this paper. The ultimate responsibility 
for knowing customers always lies with the bank. Banks should use the following criteria to 
determine whether an introducer can be relied upon:12 

it must comply with the minimum customer due diligence practices identified in this 
paper; 

the customer due diligence procedures of the introducer should be as rigorous as 
those which the bank would have conducted itself for the customer; 

the bank must satisfy itself as to the reliability of the systems put in place by the 
introducer to verify the identity of the customer;  

the bank must reach agreement with the introducer that it will be permitted to verify 
the due diligence undertaken by the introducer at any stage; and 

all relevant identification data and other documentation pertaining to the customer's 
identity should be immediately submitted by the introducer to the bank, who must 
carefully review the documentation provided. Such information must be available for 
review by the supervisor and the financial intelligence unit or equivalent enforcement 
agency, where appropriate legal authority has been obtained.  
In addition, banks should conduct periodic reviews to ensure that an introducer which it relies 
on continues to conform to the criteria set out above. 
2.2.4 
Client accounts opened by professional intermediaries 
37. 
When a bank has knowledge or reason to believe that a client account opened by a 
professional intermediary is on behalf of a single client, that client must be identified. 
38. 
Banks often hold “pooled” accounts managed by professional intermediaries on 
behalf of entities such as mutual funds, pension funds and money funds. Banks also hold 
                                                
12  The FATF is currently engaged in a review of the appropriateness of eligible introducers. 
10 
 
pooled accounts managed by lawyers or stockbrokers that represent funds held on deposit 
or in escrow for a range of clients. Where funds held by the intermediary are not co-mingled 
at the bank, but where there are “sub-accounts” which can be attributable to each beneficial 
owner, all beneficial owners of the account held by the intermediary must be identified. 
39. 
Where the funds are co-mingled, the bank should look through to the beneficial 
owners. There can be circumstances where the bank may not need to look beyond the 
intermediary, for example, when the intermediary is subject to the same regulatory and 
money laundering legislation and procedures, and in particular is subject to the same due 
diligence standards in respect of its client base as the bank. National supervisory guidance 
should clearly set out those circumstances in which banks need not look beyond the 
intermediary. Banks should accept such accounts only on the condition that they are able to 
establish that the intermediary has engaged in a sound due diligence process and has the 
systems and controls to allocate the assets in the pooled accounts to the relevant 
beneficiaries. In assessing the due diligence process of the intermediary, the bank should 
apply the criteria set out in paragraph 36 above, in respect of introduced business, in order to 
determine whether a professional intermediary can be relied upon. 
40. 
Where the intermediary is not empowered to furnish the required information on 
beneficiaries to the bank, for example, lawyers13 bound by professional secrecy codes or 
when that intermediary is not subject to due diligence standards equivalent to those set out in 
this paper or to the requirements of comprehensive anti-money laundering legislation, then 
the bank should not permit the intermediary to open an account.  
2.2.5  
Politically exposed persons 
41. 
Business relationships with individuals holding important public positions and with 
persons or companies clearly related to them may expose a bank to significant reputational 
and/or legal risks. Such politically exposed persons (“PEPs”) are individuals who are or have 
been entrusted with prominent public functions, including heads of state or of government, 
senior politicians, senior government, judicial or military officials, senior executives of publicly 
owned corporations and important political party officials. There is always a possibility, 
especially in countries where corruption is widespread, that such persons abuse their public 
powers for their own illicit enrichment through the receipt of bribes, embezzlement, etc. 
42. 
Accepting and managing funds from corrupt PEPs will severely damage the bank’s 
own reputation and can undermine public confidence in the ethical standards of an entire 
financial centre, since such cases usually receive extensive media attention and strong 
political reaction, even if the illegal origin of the assets is often difficult to prove. In addition, 
the bank may be subject to costly information requests and seizure orders from law 
enforcement or judicial authorities (including international mutual assistance procedures in 
criminal matters) and could be liable to actions for damages by the state concerned or the 
victims of a regime. Under certain circumstances, the bank and/or its officers and employees 
themselves can be exposed to charges of money laundering, if they know or should have 
known that the funds stemmed from corruption or other serious crimes.  
43. 
Some countries have recently amended or are in the process of amending their laws 
and regulations to criminalise active corruption of foreign civil servants and public officers in 
                                                
13  The FATF is currently engaged in a review of KYC procedures governing accounts opened by lawyers on 
behalf of clients.  
 
 
11
 
accordance with the relevant international convention.14 In these jurisdictions foreign 
corruption becomes a predicate offence for money laundering and all the relevant anti-money 
laundering laws and regulations apply (e.g. reporting of suspicious transactions, prohibition 
on informing the customer, internal freeze of funds etc). But even in the absence of such an 
explicit legal basis in criminal law, it is clearly undesirable, unethical and incompatible with 
the fit and proper conduct of banking operations to accept or maintain a business relationship 
if the bank knows or must assume that the funds derive from corruption or misuse of public 
assets. There is a compelling need for a bank considering a relationship with a person whom 
it suspects of being a PEP to identify that person fully, as well as people and companies that 
are clearly related to him/her.  
44. 
Banks should gather sufficient information from a new customer, and check publicly 
available information, in order to establish whether or not the customer is a PEP. Banks 
should investigate the source of funds before accepting a PEP. The decision to open an 
account for a PEP should be taken at a senior management level. 
2.2.6 
Non-face-to-face customers 
45. 
Banks are increasingly asked to open accounts on behalf of customers who do not 
present themselves for personal interview. This has always been a frequent event in the 
case of non-resident customers, but it has increased significantly with the recent expansion 
of postal, telephone and electronic banking. Banks should apply equally effective customer 
identification procedures and on-going monitoring standards for non-face-to-face customers 
as for those available for interview. One issue that has arisen in this connection is the 
possibility of independent verification by a reputable third party. This whole subject of non-
face-to-face customer identification is being discussed by the FATF, and is also under review 
in the context of amending the 1991 EEC Directive.   
46. 
A typical example of a non-face-to-face customer is one who wishes to conduct 
electronic banking via the Internet or similar technology. Electronic banking currently 
incorporates a wide array of products and services delivered over telecommunications 
networks. The impersonal and borderless nature of electronic banking combined with the 
speed of the transaction inevitably creates difficulty in customer identification and verification. 
As a basic policy, supervisors expect that banks should proactively assess various risks 
posed by emerging technologies and design customer identification procedures with due 
regard to such risks.15  
47. 
Even though the same documentation can be provided by face-to-face and non-
face-to-face customers, there is a greater difficulty in matching the customer with the 
documentation in the case of non-face-to-face customers. With telephone and electronic 
banking, the verification problem is made even more difficult. 
48. 
In accepting business from non-face-to-face customers: 

banks should apply equally effective customer identification procedures for non-
face-to-face customers as for those available for interview; and 
                                                
14 See OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business 
Transactions, adopted by the Negotiating Conference on 21 November 1997. 
15  The Electronic Banking Group of the Basel Committee issued a paper on risk management principles for 
electronic banking in May 2001.  
12 
 

there must be specific and adequate measures to mitigate the higher risk. 
Examples of measures to mitigate risk include: 

certification of documents presented; 

requisition of additional documents to complement those which are required for 
face-to-face customers; 

independent contact with the customer by the bank;  

third party introduction, e.g. by an introducer subject to the criteria established in 
paragraph 36; or 

requiring the first payment to be carried out through an account in the customer’s 
name with another bank subject to similar customer due diligence standards. 
2.2.7 
Correspondent banking 
49. 
Correspondent banking is the provision of banking services by one bank (the 
“correspondent bank”) to another bank (the “respondent bank”). Used by banks throughout 
the world, correspondent accounts enable banks to conduct business and provide services 
that the banks do not offer directly. Correspondent accounts that merit particular care involve 
the provision of services in jurisdictions where the respondent banks have no physical 
presence. However, if banks fail to apply an appropriate level of due diligence to such 
accounts, they expose themselves to the range of risks identified earlier in this paper, and 
may find themselves holding and/or transmitting money linked to corruption, fraud or other 
illegal activity. 
50. 
Banks should gather sufficient information about their respondent banks to 
understand fully the nature of the respondent’s business. Factors to consider include: 
information about the respondent bank’s management, major business activities, where they 
are located and its money-laundering prevention and detection efforts; the purpose of the 
account; the identity of any third party entities that will use the correspondent banking 
services; and the condition of bank regulation and supervision in the respondent’s country. 
Banks should only establish correspondent relationships with foreign banks that are 
effectively supervised by the relevant authorities. For their part, respondent banks should 
have effective customer acceptance and KYC policies. 
51. 
In particular, banks should refuse to enter into or continue a correspondent banking 
relationship with a bank incorporated in a jurisdiction in which it has no physical presence 
and which is unaffiliated with a regulated financial group (i.e. shell banks). Banks should pay 
particular attention when continuing relationships with respondent banks located in 
jurisdictions that have poor KYC standards or have been identified as being “non-
cooperative” in the fight against anti-money laundering. Banks should establish that their 
respondent banks have due diligence standards as set out in this paper, and employ 
enhanced due diligence procedures with respect to transactions carried out though the 
correspondent accounts.  
52. 
Banks should be particularly alert to the risk that correspondent accounts might be 
used directly by third parties to transact business on their own behalf (e.g. payable-through 
accounts). Such arrangements give rise to most of the same considerations applicable to 
introduced business and should be treated in accordance with the criteria set out in 
paragraph 36.  
 
 
13
 
3. 
On-going monitoring of accounts and transactions 
53. 
On-going monitoring is an essential aspect of effective KYC procedures. Banks can 
only effectively control and reduce their risk if they have an understanding of normal and 
reasonable account activity of their customers so that they have a means of identifying 
transactions which fall outside the regular pattern of an account’s activity. Without such 
knowledge, they are likely to fail in their duty to report suspicious transactions to the 
appropriate authorities in cases where they are required to do so. The extent of the 
monitoring needs to be risk-sensitive. For all accounts, banks should have systems in place 
to detect unusual or suspicious patterns of activity. This can be done by establishing limits for 
a particular class or category of accounts. Particular attention should be paid to transactions 
that exceed these limits. Certain types of transactions should alert banks to the possibility 
that the customer is conducting unusual or suspicious activities. They may include 
transactions that do not appear to make economic or commercial sense, or that involve large 
amounts of cash deposits that are not consistent with the normal and expected transactions 
of the customer. Very high account turnover, inconsistent with the size of the balance, may 
indicate that funds are being “washed” through the account. Examples of suspicious activities 
can be very helpful to banks and should be included as part of a jurisdiction’s anti-money-
laundering procedures and/or guidance. 
54. 
There should be intensified monitoring for higher risk accounts. Every bank should 
set key indicators for such accounts, taking note of the background of the customer, such as 
the country of origin and source of funds, the type of transactions involved, and other risk 
factors. For higher risk accounts: 

Banks should ensure that they have adequate management information systems to 
provide managers and compliance officers with timely information needed to 
identify, analyse and effectively monitor higher risk customer accounts. The types of 
reports that may be needed include reports of missing account opening 
documentation, transactions made through a customer account that are unusual, 
and aggregations of a customer’s total relationship with the bank. 

Senior management in charge of private banking business should know the 
personal circumstances of the bank’s high risk customers and be alert to sources of 
third party information. Significant transactions by these customers should be 
approved by a senior manager. 

Banks should develop a clear policy and internal guidelines, procedures and 
controls and remain especially vigilant regarding business relationships with PEPs 
and high profile individuals or with persons and companies that are clearly related to 
or associated with them.16 As all PEPs may not be identified initially and since 
existing customers may subsequently acquire PEP status, regular reviews of at least 
the more important customers should be undertaken. 
                                                
16  It is unrealistic to expect the bank to know or investigate every distant family, political or business connection 
of a foreign customer. The need to pursue suspicions will depend on the size of the assets or turnover, pattern 
of transactions, economic background, reputation of the country, plausibility of the customer’s explanations 
etc. It should however be noted that PEPs (or rather their family members and friends) would not necessarily 
present themselves in that capacity, but rather as ordinary (albeit wealthy) business people, masking the fact 
they owe their high position in a legitimate business corporation only to their privileged relation with the holder 
of the public office. 
14 
 
4.  
Risk management  
55. 
Effective KYC procedures embrace routines for proper management oversight, 
systems and controls, segregation of duties, training and other related policies. The board of 
directors of the bank should be fully committed to an effective KYC programme by 
establishing appropriate procedures and ensuring their effectiveness. Explicit responsibility 
should be allocated within the bank for ensuring that the bank's policies and procedures are 
managed effectively and are, at a minimum, in accordance with local supervisory practice. 
The channels for reporting suspicious transactions should be clearly specified in writing, and 
communicated to all personnel. There should also be internal procedures for assessing 
whether the bank’s statutory obligations under recognised suspicious activity reporting 
regimes require the transaction to be reported to the appropriate law enforcement and and/or 
supervisory authorities. 
56. 
Banks’ internal audit and compliance functions have important responsibilities in 
evaluating and ensuring adherence to KYC policies and procedures. As a general rule, the 
compliance function should provide an independent evaluation of the bank’s own policies 
and procedures, including legal and regulatory requirements. Its responsibilities should 
include ongoing monitoring of staff performance through sample testing of compliance and 
review of exception reports to alert senior management or the Board of Directors if it believes 
management is failing to address KYC procedures in a responsible manner.  
57. 
Internal audit plays an important role in independently evaluating the risk 
management and controls, discharging its responsibility to the Audit Committee of the Board 
of Directors or a similar oversight body through periodic evaluations of the effectiveness of 
compliance with KYC policies and procedures, including related staff training. Management 
should ensure that audit functions are staffed adequately with individuals who are well-
versed in such policies and procedures. In addition, internal auditors should be proactive in 
following-up their findings and criticisms. 
58. 
All banks must have an ongoing employee-training programme so that bank staff 
are adequately trained in KYC procedures. The timing and content of training for various 
sectors of staff will need to be adapted by the bank for its own needs. Training requirements 
should have a different focus for new staff, front-line staff, compliance staff or staff dealing 
with new customers. New staff should be educated in the importance of KYC policies and the 
basic requirements at the bank. Front-line staff members who deal directly with the public 
should be trained to verify the identity of new customers, to exercise due diligence in 
handling accounts of existing customers on an ongoing basis and to detect patterns of 
suspicious activity. Regular refresher training should be provided to ensure that staff are 
reminded of their responsibilities and are kept informed of new developments. It is crucial 
that all relevant staff fully understand the need for and implement KYC policies consistently. 
A culture within banks that promotes such understanding is the key to successful 
implementation.  
59. 
In many countries, external auditors also have an important role to play in 
monitoring banks’ internal controls and procedures, and in confirming that they are in 
compliance with supervisory practice. 
IV. 
The role of supervisors  
60. 
Based on existing international KYC standards, national supervisors are expected to 
set out supervisory practice governing banks’ KYC programmes. The essential elements as 
 
 
15
 
presented in this paper should provide clear guidance for supervisors to proceed with the 
work of designing or improving national supervisory practice.  
61. 
In addition to setting out the basic elements for banks to follow, supervisors have a 
responsibility to monitor that banks are applying sound KYC procedures and are sustaining 
ethical and professional standards on a continuous basis. Supervisors should ensure that 
appropriate internal controls are in place and that banks are in compliance with supervisory 
and regulatory guidance. The supervisory process should include not only a review of 
policies and procedures but also a review of customer files and the sampling of some 
accounts. Supervisors should always have the right to access all documentation related to 
accounts maintained in that jurisdiction, including any analysis the bank has made to detect 
unusual or suspicious transactions. 
62. 
Supervisors have a duty not only to ensure their banks maintain high KYC standards 
to protect their own safety and soundness but also to protect the integrity of their national 
banking system.17 Supervisors should make it clear that they will take appropriate action, 
which may be severe and public if the circumstances warrant, against banks and their 
officers who demonstrably fail to follow their own internal procedures and regulatory 
requirements. In addition, supervisors should ensure that banks are aware of and pay 
particular attention to transactions that involve jurisdictions where standards are considered 
inadequate. The FATF and some national authorities have listed a number of countries and 
jurisdictions that are considered to have legal and administrative arrangements that do not 
comply with international standards for combating money laundering. Such findings should 
be a component of a bank's KYC policies and procedures.  
V. 
Implementation of KYC standards in a cross-border context 
63. 
Supervisors around the world should seek, to the best of their efforts, to develop and 
implement their national KYC standards fully in line with international standards so as to 
avoid potential regulatory arbitrage and safeguard the integrity of domestic and international 
banking systems. The implementation and assessment of such standards put to the test the 
willingness of supervisors to cooperate with each other in a very practical way, as well as the 
ability of banks to control risks on a groupwide basis. This is a challenging task for banks and 
supervisors alike. 
64. 
Supervisors expect banking groups to apply an accepted minimum standard of KYC 
policies and procedures to both their local and overseas operations. The supervision of 
international banking can only be effectively carried out on a consolidated basis, and 
reputational risk as well as other banking risks are not limited to national boundaries. Parent 
banks must communicate their policies and procedures to their overseas branches and 
subsidiaries, including non-banking entities such as trust companies, and have a routine for 
testing compliance against both home and host country KYC standards in order for their 
programmes to operate effectively globally. Such compliance tests will also be tested by 
external auditors and supervisors. Therefore, it is important that KYC documentation is 
properly filed and available for their inspection. As far as compliance checks are concerned, 
supervisors and external auditors should in most cases examine systems and controls and 
look at customer accounts and transactions monitoring as part of a sampling process.  
                                                
17  Many supervisors also have a duty to report any suspicious, unusual or illegal transactions that they detect, for 
example, during onsite examinations. 
16 
 
65. 
However small an overseas establishment is, a senior officer should be designated 
to be directly responsible for ensuring that all relevant staff are trained in, and observe, KYC 
procedures that meet both home and host standards. While this officer will bear primary 
responsibility, he should be supported by internal auditors and compliance officers from both 
local and head offices as appropriate. 
66. 
Where the minimum KYC standards of the home and host countries differ, branches 
and subsidiaries in the host jurisdictions should apply the higher standard of the two. In 
general, there should be no impediment to prevent a bank from adopting standards that are 
higher than the minima required locally. If, however, local laws and regulations (especially 
secrecy provisions) prohibit the implementation of home country KYC standards, where the 
latter are more stringent, host country supervisors should use their best endeavours to have 
the law and regulations changed. In the meantime, overseas branches and subsidiaries 
would have to comply with host country standards, but they should make sure the head office 
or parent bank and its home country supervisor are fully informed of the nature of the 
difference.  
67. 
Criminal elements are likely to be drawn toward jurisdictions with such impediments. 
Hence, banks should be aware of the high reputational risk of conducting business in these 
jurisdictions. Parent banks should have a procedure for reviewing the vulnerability of the 
individual operating units and implement additional safeguards where appropriate. In 
extreme cases, supervisors should consider placing additional controls on banks operating in 
those jurisdictions and ultimately perhaps encouraging their withdrawal.  
68. 
During on-site inspections, home country supervisors or auditors should face no 
impediments in verifying the unit’s compliance with KYC policies and procedures. This will 
require a review of customer files and some random sampling of accounts. Home country 
supervisors should have access to information on sampled individual customer accounts to 
the extent necessary to enable a proper evaluation of the application of KYC standards and 
an assessment of risk management practices, and should not be impeded by local bank 
secrecy laws. Where the home country supervisor requires consolidated reporting of deposit 
or borrower concentrations or notification of funds under management, there should be no 
impediments. In addition, with a view to monitoring deposit concentrations or the funding risk 
of the deposit being withdrawn, home supervisors may apply materiality tests and establish 
some thresholds so that if a customer’s deposit exceeds a certain percentage of the balance 
sheet, banks should report it to the home supervisor. However, safeguards are needed to 
ensure that information regarding individual accounts is used exclusively for lawful 
supervisory purposes, and can be protected by the recipient in a satisfactory manner. A 
statement of mutual cooperation18 to facilitate information sharing between the two 
supervisors would be helpful in this regard. 
69. 
In certain cases there may be a serious conflict between the KYC policies of a 
parent bank imposed by its home authority and what is permitted in a cross-border office. 
There may, for example, be local laws that prevent inspections by the parent banks’ 
compliance officers, internal auditors or home country supervisors, or that enable bank 
customers to use fictitious names or to hide behind agents or intermediaries that are 
forbidden from revealing who their clients are. In such cases, the home supervisor should 
communicate with the host supervisor in order to confirm whether there are indeed genuine 
legal impediments and whether they apply extraterritorially. If they prove to be 
                                                
18  See the Basel Committee paper Essential elements of a statement of cooperation between banking 
supervisors (May 2001). 
 
 
17
 
insurmountable, and there are no satisfactory alternative arrangements, the home supervisor 
should make it clear to the host that the bank may decide for itself, or be required by its 
home supervisor, to close down the operation in question. In the final analysis, any 
arrangements underpinning such on-site examinations should provide a mechanism that 
permits an assessment that is satisfactory to the home supervisor. Statements of 
cooperation or memoranda of understanding setting out the mechanics of the arrangements 
may be helpful. Access to information by home country supervisors should be as unrestricted 
as possible, and at a minimum they should have free access to the banks' general policies 
and procedures for customer due diligence and for dealing with suspicions.  
 
18 
 
Annex 1 
Excerpts from Core Principles Methodology 
Principle 15: Banking supervisors must determine that banks have adequate policies, 
practices and procedures in place, including strict “know-your-customer” rules, that promote 
high ethical and professional standards in the financial sector and prevent the bank being 
used, intentionally or unintentionally, by criminal elements. 
Essential criteria 
1. 
The supervisor determines that banks have in place adequate policies, practices 
and procedures that promote high ethical and professional standards and prevent 
the bank from being used, intentionally or unintentionally, by criminal elements. This 
includes the prevention and detection of criminal activity or fraud, and reporting of 
such suspected activities to the appropriate authorities. 
2. 
The supervisor determines that banks have documented and enforced policies for 
identification of customers and those acting on their behalf as part of their anti-
money-laundering program. There are clear rules on what records must be kept on 
customer identification and individual transactions and the retention period. 
3. 
The supervisor determines that banks have formal procedures to recognise 
potentially suspicious transactions. These might include additional authorisation for 
large cash (or similar) deposits or withdrawals and special procedures for unusual 
transactions. 
4. 
The supervisor determines that banks appoint a senior officer with explicit 
responsibility for ensuring that the bank's policies and procedures are, at a 
minimum, in accordance with local statutory and regulatory anti-money laundering 
requirements. 
5. 
The supervisor determines that banks have clear procedures, communicated to all 
personnel, for staff to report suspicious transactions to the dedicated senior officer 
responsible for anti-money laundering compliance. 
6. 
The supervisor determines that banks have established lines of communication both 
to management and to an internal security (guardian) function for reporting 
problems. 
7. 
In addition to reporting to the appropriate criminal authorities, banks report to the 
supervisor suspicious activities and incidents of fraud material to the safety, 
soundness or reputation of the bank. 
8. 
Laws, regulations and/or banks’ policies ensure that a member of staff who reports 
suspicious transactions in good faith to the dedicated senior officer, internal security 
function, or directly to the relevant authority cannot be held liable. 
9. 
The supervisor periodically checks that banks’ money laundering controls and their 
systems for preventing, identifying and reporting fraud are sufficient. The supervisor 
has adequate enforcement powers (regulatory and/or criminal prosecution) to take 
 
 
19
 
action against a bank that does not comply with its anti-money laundering 
obligations. 
10. 
The supervisor is able, directly or indirectly, to share with domestic and foreign 
financial sector supervisory authorities information related to suspected or actual 
criminal activities. 
11. 
The supervisor determines that banks have a policy statement on ethics and 
professional behaviour that is clearly communicated to all staff. 
Additional criteria 
1. 
The laws and/or regulations embody international sound practices, such as 
compliance with the relevant forty Financial Action Task Force Recommendations 
issued in 1990 (revised 1996). 
2. 
The supervisor determines that bank staff is adequately trained on money 
laundering detection and prevention. 
3. 
The supervisor has the legal obligation to inform the relevant criminal authorities of 
any suspicious transactions. 
4. 
The supervisor is able, directly or indirectly, to share with relevant judicial authorities 
information related to suspected or actual criminal activities. 
5. 
If not performed by another agency, the supervisor has in-house resources with 
specialist expertise on financial fraud and anti-money laundering obligations. 
20 
 
Annex 2 
Excerpts from FATF recommendations 
C. 
Role of the financial system in combating money laundering 
Customer Identification and Record-keeping Rules 
10. 
Financial institutions should not keep anonymous accounts or accounts in obviously 
fictitious names: they should be required (by law, by regulations, by agreements 
between supervisory authorities and financial institutions or by self-regulatory 
agreements among financial institutions) to identify, on the basis of an official or 
other reliable identifying document, and record the identity of their clients, either 
occasional or usual, when establishing business relations or conducting transactions 
(in particular opening of accounts or passbooks, entering into fiduciary transactions, 
renting of safe deposit boxes, performing large cash transactions). 
 
In order to fulfil identification requirements concerning legal entities, financial 
institutions should, when necessary, take measures: 
(i) 
to verify the legal existence and structure of the customer by obtaining either 
from a public register or from the customer or both, proof of incorporation, 
including information concerning the customer's name, legal form, address, 
directors and provisions regulating the power to bind the entity. 
(ii) 
to verify that any person purporting to act on behalf of the customer is so 
authorised and identify that person. 
11. 
Financial institutions should take reasonable measures to obtain information about 
the true identity of the persons on whose behalf an account is opened or a 
transaction conducted if there are any doubts as to whether these clients or 
customers are acting on their own behalf, for example, in the case of domiciliary 
companies (i.e. institutions, corporations, foundations, trusts, etc. that do not 
conduct any commercial or manufacturing business or any other form of commercial 
operation in the country where their registered office is located). 
12. 
Financial institutions should maintain, for at least five years, all necessary records 
on transactions, both domestic or international, to enable them to comply swiftly with 
information requests from the competent authorities. Such records must be sufficient 
to permit reconstruction of individual transactions (including the amounts and types 
of currency involved if any) so as to provide, if necessary, evidence for prosecution 
of criminal behaviour. 
 
Financial institutions should keep records on customer identification (e.g. copies or 
records of official identification documents like passports, identity cards, driving 
licenses or similar documents), account files and business correspondence for at 
least five years after the account is closed. 
 
These documents should be available to domestic competent authorities in the 
context of relevant criminal prosecutions and investigations. 
 
 
21
 
13. 
Countries should pay special attention to money laundering threats inherent in new 
or developing technologies that might favour anonymity, and take measures, if 
needed, to prevent their use in money laundering schemes. 
Increased Diligence of Financial Institutions 
14. 
Financial institutions should pay special attention to all complex, unusual large 
transactions, and all unusual patterns of transactions, which have no apparent 
economic or visible lawful purpose. The background and purpose of such 
transactions should, as far as possible, be examined, the findings established in 
writing, and be available to help supervisors, auditors and law enforcement 
agencies. 
15. 
If financial institutions suspect that funds stem from a criminal activity, they should 
be required to report promptly their suspicions to the competent authorities. 
16. 
Financial institutions, their directors, officers and employees should be protected by 
legal provisions from criminal or civil liability for breach of any restriction on 
disclosure of information imposed by contract or by any legislative, regulatory or 
administrative provision, if they report their suspicions in good faith to the competent 
authorities, even if they did not know precisely what the underlying criminal activity 
was, and regardless of whether illegal activity actually occurred. 
17. 
Financial institutions, their directors, officers and employees, should not, or, where 
appropriate, should not be allowed to, warn their customers when information 
relating to them is being reported to the competent authorities. 
18. 
Financial institutions reporting their suspicions should comply with instructions from 
the competent authorities. 
19. 
Financial institutions should develop programs against money laundering. These 
programs should include, as a minimum: 
(i) 
the development of internal policies, procedures and controls, including the 
designation of compliance officers at management level, and adequate 
screening procedures to ensure high standards when hiring employees; 
(ii) 
an ongoing employee training programme; 
(iii) 
an audit function to test the system. 
 

RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
(FOREIGN EXCHANGE DEPARTMENT) 
CENTRAL OFFICE 
MUMBAI  400 001 
Notification No. FEMA 401/2026-RB 
 April 30, 2026 
Foreign Exchange Management (Authorised Persons) Regulations, 2026 
In exercise of the powers conferred under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of Section 47 read 
with Section 10 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and all other 
powers enabling it in this behalf, the Reserve Bank hereby, makes the following regulations, 
namely,  
Chapter I – Preliminary 
1. Short title and commencement - (1) These regulations may be called the Foreign
Exchange Management (Authorised Persons) Regulations, 2026.
(2) These regulations shall come into force from the date of their publication in the Official
Gazette.
2. Definitions - (1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
defined herein shall bear the meanings assigned to them below, and their cognate
expressions shall be construed accordingly, –
(a) “Act” means the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999);
(b) “Annual Forex Turnover” means the aggregate of foreign exchange purchased and
sold by an authorised person or a Forex Correspondent from/to the public directly,
and through its agents/franchisees/Forex Correspondents, during a financial year,
excluding the value of inward remittances processed;
(c) “Authorised Dealer (AD)” means a person authorised as an authorised dealer under
sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Act;
(d) “Company” means a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of
2013);
(e) “Control” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under sub-section (27) of
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);
(f) “Director” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under sub-section (34) of
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);
2 
 
(g) “Forex Correspondent (FxC)” means an agent of an Authorised Dealer appointed in 
terms of the Forex Correspondent Scheme (FCS) issued by the Reserve Bank; 
(h) “Full Fledged Money Changer (FFMC)” means a money changer authorised under 
sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Act; 
(i) “‘Key Managerial Personnel (KMP)” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
under sub-section (51) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013; 
(j) “Net Worth” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under sub-section (57) of 
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); 
(k) “Promoter” shall have the meaning as assigned to it under sub-section (69) of section 
2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); 
(l) “Significant Influence” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under the 
Explanation (a) to sub-section (6) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 
2013); 
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in these regulations shall have the same 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act. 
Chapter II – Grant of Authorisation 
3. Authorisation - (1) No person shall act as an authorised person without obtaining an 
authorisation from the Reserve Bank.  
(2) An authorised person as on the date of coming into force of these regulations may 
continue to act as such until the expiry of its existing authorisation, in accordance with the 
conditions of the authorisation issued, as well as these regulations and the directions issued 
by the Reserve Bank from time to time.  
(3) A person seeking authorisation as an authorised person may apply to the Reserve Bank 
through the PRAVAAH portal (https://pravaah.rbi.org.in) to the regional office concerned of 
the Reserve Bank under whose jurisdiction the registered office of the applicant is 
established. 
(4) The Reserve Bank shall consider application for fresh authorisation under three 
categories, namely, AD Category-I, AD Category-II and AD Category-III and such application 
shall be processed in accordance with these regulations. The eligibility conditions and 
activities permitted are specified in regulations 4 and 7 below, respectively. 
3 
 
(5) Any additional information and/or documents as may be required by the Reserve Bank 
to process an application mentioned at sub-regulation (4) shall be submitted by the applicant 
within the time specified by the Reserve Bank. 
(6) Application for fresh authorisation as an FFMC shall not be considered by the Reserve 
Bank, except those under process as on the date of coming into force of these regulations. 
Wherever additional information and/or documents have been sought by the Reserve Bank 
for processing such applications, the same shall be provided within thirty days from the date 
of coming into force of these regulations; else the applications shall be deemed to have been 
rejected. Such applications shall be processed as per the eligibility conditions, documents 
and procedure listed at Annex.  
4. Eligibility conditions - (1) An applicant shall be a company incorporated under the 
Companies Act 2013.  
(2) The Memorandum of Association (MoA) of the applicant should include the foreign 
exchange related activity for which the authorisation is being sought. 
(3) An applicant shall fulfil the following criteria at the time of application:  
(4) An applicant, at the time of commencement of business as an authorised person shall 
have a minimum positive net worth (based upon its latest audited balance sheet) as 
mentioned below and shall submit a certificate to this effect from its Statutory Auditors: 
Category of AP 
Minimum Net worth  
AD Category-II 
₹10 crores 
AD Category-III 
₹2 crores 
Category of AP 
Eligible entities 
AD Category-I  
A bank licensed by the Reserve Bank. 
AD Category-II 
i. A bank licensed by or a Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) 
registered with the Reserve Bank.  
ii. A Full-Fledged Money Changer or a Forex Correspondent 
functioning for at least two years with an average annual forex 
turnover of ₹50 crore during the previous two financial years. 
AD Category-III 
An entity:  
i. required to deal in foreign exchange incidental to the activities 
undertaken by it; or  
ii. that intends to offer innovative products and services that may 
involve dealing in foreign exchange.  
4 
 
(5) The applicant, its promoters, directors and Key Managerial Personnel (KMPs) shall be 
‘fit and proper’ on the following aspects:  
(a) qualification and experience in the financial services industry. 
(b) integrity, reputation and character. 
(c) absence of convictions or restraint orders from a court of law, disqualifications under 
the Companies Act, 2013 or other applicable corporate law, sanctions imposed by a 
regulatory body, or expulsion from a professional body: 
Provided that at least 50% of the directors and KMPs have qualification and experience in 
the financial services industry.  
(6) In case an applicant or any of its promoters, directors or KMPs or its parent entity is 
under investigation by Directorate of Enforcement (DoE), the applicant shall furnish, along 
with the application, a No Objection Certificate (NOC) obtained from DoE, which is dated 
not earlier than thirty days from the date of such application: 
Provided that where no reply has been received from the DoE within 60 days of receipt of 
request, the application will be processed without NOC from the DoE based on the 
declaration to this effect by the applicant. Such request to DoE should have been made not 
earlier than ninety days from the date of application to the Reserve Bank.  
(7) Exemption - Sub-regulation (1), (4) and (5) of this regulation shall not be applicable to 
the entities regulated by the Reserve Bank under the provisions of other Acts. 
5. Renewal of authorisation of existing authorised persons - (1) An entity conducting 
activities as an authorised person as on the date of coming into force of these regulations 
may apply for renewal of its existing authorisation under these regulations, if its Net worth is 
a minimum of –  
(a) ₹25 lakh, in case of a single branch FFMC;  
(b) ₹50 lakh, in case of a multiple branch FFMC;  
(c) ₹10 crore, in case of an AD Category-II; 
(d) ₹2 crore, in case of an AD Category-III: 
and it is in compliance with provisions of sub regulation (5) and (6) of regulation 4. 
(2) An application for renewal of existing authorisation shall be made at least two months 
before expiry of the existing authorisation. In such case, the existing authorisation shall 
continue till renewal is granted under these regulations or the application is rejected, as the 
case may be. 
5 
 
6. Consideration of application - (1) The Reserve Bank, while considering an application, 
shall examine all matters which it deems relevant, including but not limited to the eligibility 
conditions specified in these regulations, and in case of entities regulated by the Reserve 
Bank, the inputs of the respective regulatory and supervisory departments of the Reserve 
Bank.  
(2) Any application for grant or renewal of authorisation–  
(a) which is incorrect, false or misleading in nature; or 
(b) where the applicant is not in compliance with the eligibility requirements as set out 
under these regulations; or 
(c) where the applicant or any of its promoter or director or KMPs is not a ‘fit and 
proper person' in compliance with the eligibility requirements stated in regulation 4(5) 
of these regulations; or 
(d) which is not in public interest; 
may be rejected by the Reserve Bank.  
(3) Any application for grant or renewal of authorisation from an entity– 
(a) whose authorisation has been revoked for any reason; or 
(b) which has voluntarily surrendered its authorisation for any reason; or 
(c) whose application for grant or renewal of authorisation has been rejected by the 
Reserve Bank for any reason other than the inability to meet the net worth; or 
(d) where one or more of the promoters or directors or KMPs have significant 
influence in any of the entities listed at clause (a), (b) and (c) of this sub-regulation; 
shall not be considered by the Reserve Bank for a period of one year from the date of 
revocation or voluntary surrender of authorisation or rejection of application, as the case 
may be. 
Chapter III – Permitted Activities 
7. Permitted Activities - An authorised person shall be permitted to facilitate activities listed 
below, unless otherwise specifically permitted or restricted by the Reserve Bank: 
Category  
Permitted Activities 
AD Category-I  Any current account and capital account transaction permissible 
under the Act.  
6 
 
AD Category-II  
i. Any non-trade current account transaction permissible under 
the Act, other than gift and donation. 
ii. Foreign trade transactions up to ₹25 lakh per transaction.  
AD Category-
III 
As mentioned in the authorisation issued by the Reserve Bank. 
Full 
Fledged 
Money 
Changer 
(FFMC) 
 
i. Purchase of foreign currency notes and travellers’ cheques;  
ii. Sale of foreign currency notes and travellers’ cheques for 
foreign travel purposes; and 
iii. Functioning as an agent under the MTSS in accordance with 
the guidelines on Money Transfer Service Scheme (MTSS). 
 
Chapter IV - Conditions of authorisation 
8. Conditions of authorisation - (1) An authorisation granted under these regulations shall 
be valid until revoked or surrendered: 
Provided that an authorisation granted to a bank or an NBFC shall be co-terminus with its 
Banking Licence or Certificate of Registration respectively. 
(2) An authorisation granted by the Reserve Bank shall be subject to the conditions laid 
down therein. The Reserve Bank may at any time vary or revoke any of the existing 
conditions of authorisation or impose new conditions. 
(3) An authorised person, other than a bank or an NBFC, shall achieve minimum annual 
forex turnover as given below, within two years from the date of coming into force of these 
regulations or from the commencement of forex business, whichever is later, and shall 
maintain the minimum annual forex turnover thereafter on an ongoing basis:  
Category of AP 
Minimum annual forex turnover  
AD Category-II 
₹50 crores 
FFMC 
₹10 crores 
(4) The requirements under these regulations, or as specified by the Reserve Bank from 
time to time, including minimum net worth, turnover and ‘fit and proper’ status, shall be 
fulfilled on an ongoing basis and any deviation shall be immediately brought to the notice of 
the Reserve Bank.  
(5) If the net worth of the authorised person falls below the minimum specified in these 
regulations, the authorised person shall restore the net worth to the required minimum, 
within a period of six months, or such additional time as the Reserve Bank may grant. Failure 
to do so may lead to revocation of authorisation.    
(6) An authorised person, other than a bank shall:  
7 
 
(a) commence its operations within a period of six months from the date of issuance of 
authorisation, under intimation to the regional office concerned of the Reserve Bank;  
(b) seek prior approval from the Reserve Bank before any change in management or 
control or ownership of more than 50%; 
(c) report to the regional office concerned of the Reserve Bank within a period of 30 days 
from the end of financial year, any change of director or of a KMP, and events/ 
information that may affect the ‘fit and proper’ status of an existing promoter or 
director or KMP during the year; 
(d) report to the regional office concerned of the Reserve Bank, details of investigation 
initiated against it by the DoE, within 30 days of becoming aware about the 
investigation.  
(7) An authorised person may conduct activities permitted to it under these regulations from 
any place of business. An authorised person, other than a bank, shall submit to the Reserve 
Bank, through APConnect1 application (https://apconnect.rbi.org.in/) information regarding: 
(a) conduct of business from any new place (including opening a temporary counter) 
within seven calendar days of beginning of operations at the new place; 
(b) closure of a place of business including that of a temporary counter within seven 
calendar days of such closure; and  
(c) shifting of the registered office, not being a place of business, within seven calendar 
days of shifting. 
(8) An authorised person while dealing in foreign exchange (either directly or through an 
FxC or Franchisee) shall ensure compliance with sub-section (5) of section 10 of the Act. 
(9) An authorisation may be revoked by the Reserve Bank at any time if it is satisfied that: 
(a) it is in public interest to do so; or   
(b) the authorised person has failed to comply with any condition of authorisation or has 
contravened any of the provisions of the Act or any rule, regulation, notification, 
direction or order made thereunder. 
Chapter V – Appeal Mechanism 
9. Appeal - (1) An applicant whose application for authorisation has been rejected by the 
Reserve Bank or an authorised person whose authorisation has been revoked, may appeal 
 
1 APConnect shall also refer to any other system specified by the Reserve Bank, for the purpose. 
 
8 
 
against the rejection of the application or revocation to the Appellate Authority namely, the 
Executive Director in charge of the Foreign Exchange Department, Central Office, Reserve 
Bank of India, Mumbai.  
(2) An appeal under sub-regulation (1) shall be filed within forty-five calendar days from the 
date of receipt of the letter intimating rejection of application or revocation of authorisation.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal, the Appellate Authority may, after giving applicant an opportunity 
of being heard, pass a reasoned order within sixty calendar days from the date of receipt of 
appeal.  
Chapter VI – Forex Correspondent Scheme (FCS) 
10. Forex Correspondent - (1) An Authorised Dealer Category-I or an Authorised Dealer 
Category-II may appoint an entity or entities as agent, known as Forex Correspondent (FxC), 
for conducting money changing business under a ‘principal-agent’ model.  
(2) An FxC shall be permitted to deal in foreign exchange with any of its customer or with 
other entities as per the Forex Correspondent Scheme laid out in this chapter. 
11. Permitted Activities - An FxC is permitted to undertake the following activities: 
(a) Purchase of foreign currency notes/coins and travellers’ cheques; 
(b) Sale of foreign currency notes/coins and travellers’ cheques for foreign travel 
purposes; and  
(c) Functioning as MTSS sub-agent in accordance with the guidelines on Money Transfer 
Service Scheme (MTSS). 
12. Governance - The principal shall formulate an internal policy for engaging FxCs with 
the approval of its Board. Such policy shall, inter alia, provide for the type of entities it wishes 
to appoint as FxC, ‘fit and proper’ criteria for such entities, activities it wants to undertake 
through FxCs, requirements related to net worth, due diligence, systems and controls, 
transaction reporting, charges that may be levied by the FxC, customer service and 
grievance redressal mechanism.  
13. Functioning of FxC - (1) All transactions by an FxC under this scheme shall be reflected 
in the books of account of the principal concerned.  
(2) An FxC may act as an agent to more than one authorised dealer.  
9 
 
(3) An FxC, with the approval of its principal, may deal in foreign exchange with any other 
FxC or an authorised person, which is not its principal. 
14. Obligations of the principal - The principal shall: 
(a) issue necessary permission to each outlet of the FxC and ensure that a copy of such 
permission is displayed prominently at respective outlet;  
(b) submit details of all FxCs appointed by it, along with their place/s of business, through 
the APConnect application, to the Reserve Bank, within 15 days from the end of each 
calendar quarter;  
(c) ensure the preservation, protection, security, and confidentiality of customer 
information in the custody or possession of its FxCs; 
(d) ensure that the FxC adheres to rules, regulations and directions governing forex 
transactions under the Act, as applicable to its principal.  
15. Managing outsourcing risks - A non-bank authorised dealer, acting as a principal, 
irrespective of whether it is an NBFC or not, shall follow the guidelines contained in “Reserve 
Bank of India (Non-Banking Financial Companies – Managing Risks on Outsourcing) 
Directions, 2025”.  
Chapter VII – Franchisees of Authorised Persons  
16. Franchisees - (1) An authorised person shall not enter into any fresh franchisee 
arrangements in terms of ‘Guidelines for Appointment of Agents / Franchisees by AD 
Category-I, AD Category-II and FFMC’, contained in Section III of ‘Master Direction – Money 
Changing Activities’ as amended from time to time. 
(2) The franchisee arrangements valid as on the date of coming into force of these 
regulations shall be discontinued within two years from the date of coming into force of these 
regulations. Thereafter, the franchisees can be appointed as an FxC, subject to conditions 
laid down under the FCS. 
 
(N Senthil Kumar) 
Chief General Manager 
 
 
 
10 
 
Annex 
[Please refer to regulation 3(6)] 
 
1. The applicant shall be a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956/ Companies 
Act 2013/ Registration of Companies (Sikkim) Act, 1961. 
2. The minimum Net Owned Funds (NOF) required for consideration as FFMC are as 
follows: 
Category 
Minimum NOF 
Single branch FFMC 
₹25 lakh 
Multiple branch FFMC 
₹50 lakh 
Note: The Net Owned Funds of applicants, other than banks, should be calculated 
as per the following. 
(a) Owned Funds: (Paid-up Equity Capital + Free reserves + Credit balance in Profit 
& Loss A/c) minus (Accumulated balance of loss, Deferred revenue expenditure 
and Other intangible assets) 
(b) Net Owned Funds: Owned funds minus the amount of investments in shares of 
its subsidiaries, companies in the same group, all (other) non-banking financial 
companies as also the book value of debentures, bonds, outstanding loans and 
advances made to and deposits with its subsidiaries and companies in the same 
group in excess of 10 per cent of the Owned funds. 
3. 'Fit and proper' criteria for the applicant: If any case by DoE / DRI or any other case by 
any other law enforcing authorities, is initiated / pending against any company / its directors, 
the company will not be considered as 'fit and proper' and its application will not be 
considered for licensing as FFMC. 
4. ‘Fit and proper’ criteria for directors: 
(a) The Board of the applicant should undertake a process of due diligence to determine 
the suitability of the person for appointment / continuing to hold appointment as a 
director on the Board, based upon qualification, expertise, track record, integrity and 
other ‘fit and proper’ criteria. For assessing integrity and suitability, factors like 
criminal record, if any, financial position, civil action initiated to pursue personal debts, 
11 
 
refusal of admission to or expulsion from professional bodies, sanctions imposed by 
regulators or similar bodies, previous questionable business practices, etc. should be 
considered. The Board of Directors should assess ‘fit and proper’ status by calling for 
information by way of self-declaration, verification reports from market, etc. The 
applicant should obtain necessary information and declaration from the proposed / 
existing directors for the purpose as given in the Master direction on Reporting. 
(b) The process of due diligence should be undertaken at the time of appointment / 
renewal of appointment. 
(c) The Board of the applicant should constitute Nomination Committees to scrutinise the 
declarations. 
(d) Based on the information provided in the signed declaration, Nomination Committees 
should decide on the acceptance or otherwise and may make references, where 
considered necessary to the appropriate authority / persons, to ensure their 
compliance with the requirements indicated. 
(e) The provisions of Companies Act 2013 shall apply with regard to the age of the 
candidate. Further, the candidate should not be a Member of Parliament / Member of 
Legislative Assembly / Member of Legislative Council. 
5. Comments of respective Departments of the Reserve Bank will be obtained on the 
operations of an applicant who / whose parent organisation is already licenced / authorised 
by the Reserve Bank. 
6. Documentation: Application in the prescribed form should be submitted along with the 
following documents: 
(a) Copy of the Certificate of Incorporation. 
(b) Memorandum and Articles of Association containing a provision for undertaking 
money changing business or an appropriate amendment to this effect filed with the 
Company Law Board. 
(c) Copy of the latest audited accounts with a certificate from the Statutory Auditors 
certifying the Net Owned Funds as on the date of application. Copies of the audited 
Balance Sheet and Profit & Loss Account of the company for the last three years, 
wherever applicable. 
(d) Confidential Report from the applicant’s banker in a sealed cover. 
12 
 
(e) A declaration to the effect that no proceedings have been initiated by / are pending 
with the Directorate of Enforcement (DoE) / Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) 
or any other law enforcing authorities, against the applicant company or its directors 
and that no criminal cases are initiated / pending against the applicant company or 
its directors. 
(f) A declaration to the effect that proper policy framework on KYC guidelines issued by 
Reserve Bank of India from time to time will be put in place on obtaining the approval 
of the Reserve Bank and before commencement of operations. 
(g) Details of sister / associated concerns operating in the financial sector, like NBFCs, 
etc. 
(h) A certified copy of the board resolution for undertaking money changing business. 
7. Clearance by the Empowered Committee: The request for issuance of FFMC licence 
would be considered by the regional office concerned of the Reserve Bank on the basis of 
the clearance by an Empowered Committee, set up for the purpose. 
8. Reserve Bank’s decision in the matter of granting approval or otherwise will be final and 
binding. 

 
 
Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision 
 
 
 
 
 
Operational Risk – 
Supervisory Guidelines for 
the Advanced 
Measurement Approaches 
 
 
 
 
June 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copies of publications are available from: 
 
Bank for International Settlements 
Communications 
CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland 
 
E-mail: publications@bis.org 
Fax: +41 61 280 9100 and +41 61 280 8100 
 
 
© Bank for International Settlements 2011. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be reproduced or translated 
provided the source is stated. 
 
 
ISBN print: 92-9131-856-6 
ISBN web: 92-9197-856-6 
 
 
Members of the SIG Operational Risk Subgroup 
Chairman: Mitsutoshi Adachi, Bank of Japan 
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority   
 
 
Michael Booth 
National Bank of Belgium  
 
 
  
 
Jos Meuleman 
Banco Central do Brasil, Brazil  
 
 
 
 
Wagner Almeida 
Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, Canada  
James Dennison 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aina Liepins 
China Banking Regulatory Commission 
 
 
 
Meng Luo 
Banque de France  
  
 
 
 
 
Jean-Luc Quémard 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Germany   
 
 
 
Marcus Haas 
Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin), Germany  
 
Frank Corleis 
Reserve Bank of India  
 
 
 
 
 
Rajinder Kumar 
Bank of Italy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marco Moscadelli 
Bank of Japan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Madoka Miyamura 
Financial Services Agency, Japan   
 
 
 
Tsuyoshi Nagafuji 
Surveillance Commission for the Financial Sector, Luxembourg 
Didier Bergamo 
Netherlands Bank  
 
 
 
 
 
Claudia Zapp 
Polish Financial Supervision Authority  
 
 
 
Grazyna Szwajkowska 
Central Bank of the Russian Federation 
 
 
 
Irina Yakimova 
South African Reserve Bank 
 
 
 
 
Jan van Zyl 
Bank of Spain  
 
 
 
 
 
 
María Ángeles Nieto 
Finansinspektionen, Sweden  
 
 
 
 
Agnieszka Arshamian 
Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority 
 
 
Paul Harpes 
Financial Services Authority, United Kingdom  
 
 
Andrew Sheen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khim Murphy 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, United States 
 
Alfred Seivold 
Federal Reserve Board, United States 
 
  
 
Adrienne Townes Haden 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kenneth G. Fulton 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, United States  
 
 
Patrick de Fontnouvelle 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, United States   
 
Ronald Stroz 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, United States  
 
Carolyn DuChene 
Maurice Harris 
Office of Thrift Supervision, United States   
 
 
Eric Hirschhorn 
Financial Stability Institute  
 
 
 
 
Amarendra Mohan 
Secretariat of the Basel Committee on Banking  
 
 
Andrew Willis 
Supervision, Bank for International Settlements 
 
 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
 
Table of Contents 
Introduction...............................................................................................................................1 
Governance ............................................................................................................................11 
Verification and validation .............................................................................................11 
Use test and experience................................................................................................17 
Data ......................................................................................................................................20 
Gross loss definition......................................................................................................20 
Gross versus net internal loss amounts ........................................................................23 
Internal loss data thresholds .........................................................................................25 
Date of internal losses...................................................................................................27 
Grouped losses .............................................................................................................30 
Modelling ................................................................................................................................34 
Granularity.....................................................................................................................34 
Distributional assumptions ............................................................................................36 
Correlation and dependence.........................................................................................43 
Use of the four data elements .......................................................................................45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operational Risk—Supervisory Guidelines for  
the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
Introduction 
1. 
The Basel Committee’s Standards Implementation Group, through its Operational 
Risk Subgroup (SIGOR), has focused on the practical challenges associated with the 
development, implementation and maintenance of an operational risk (OR) management and 
measurement framework that meets the requirements of Basel II,1 particularly as they relate 
to the Advanced Measurement Approaches (AMA). The SIGOR’s mandate includes 
identifying and participating in resolving the practical challenges associated with the 
successful development, implementation and maintenance of an AMA framework.  
2. 
Consistent with this mandate, this paper identifies supervisory guidelines associated 
with the development and maintenance of key internal governance, data and modelling 
frameworks underlying an AMA. Because operational risk is an evolving discipline, this paper 
is intended to be an evergreen document, and as further issues are identified and 
expectations for convergence towards a narrower range of appropriate practices are 
developed, these too will be added to this document. 
3. 
This paper does not reduce or supersede the discretion of national supervisors to 
act in a manner that is consistent with their particular regulatory approaches. Nevertheless, 
the publication of this paper is intended to facilitate a convergence of practice by banks as 
well as national supervisors.  
Background 
4. 
In the development of the Basel II Framework, the fundamental objective of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision was to develop a framework that would further 
strengthen the soundness and stability of the international banking system while maintaining 
sufficient consistency so that capital adequacy regulation would not be a significant source of 
competitive inequality among internationally active banks. The capital regulation was also 
designed to take into account changes in banking and risk management practices while at 
the same time preserving the benefits of a framework that can be applied as uniformly as 
possible at the international level.  
5. 
In recognition of the evolutionary nature of operational risk management as a 
developing risk management discipline, the Committee provided significant flexibility to banks 
in the development of an operational risk measurement and management system. This 
flexibility was, and continues to be, a critical feature of the AMA. These features, however, 
require substantial efforts by national authorities to ensure sufficient consistency in 
application.  
6. 
Flexibility in the development of an AMA, however, does not suggest that 
supervisors are prepared to accept any practice or process that a bank adopts in 
implementing its AMA frameworks. On the contrary, supervisors are concerned with 
                                                
1  “Basel II Framework” and “Basel II”, used interchangeably in this report, refer to the Basel Committee’s 
International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework (June 
2006). 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
1
 
 
 
identifying and encouraging bank operational risk practices that achieve robust and effective 
operational risk management and measurement systems that are consistent with safety, 
soundness and level playing field objectives.  
General observations 
7. 
The Basel II Framework envisages that, over time, the operational risk discipline will 
mature and converge towards a narrower band of effective risk management and risk 
measurement practices. Understanding the current range of observed operational risk 
management and measurement practices, both within and across geographic regions, 
contributes significantly to the efforts to establish consistent supervisory expectations. 
Through the analysis of existing practices, and the publication of this paper, the Committee 
expects the maturation of operational risk practices and supports supervisors in developing 
more consistent regulatory expectations. As part of this process, the Committee has 
identified practices that fall outside the range of effective and sound operational risk 
practices.  
8. 
Irrespective of the risk management and risk measurement practices adopted, a 
bank’s operational risk strategy should reflect the nature and source of the bank’s operational 
risks for all Operational Risk Measurement System (ORMS) elements, including regular 
review of predictive elements against experience. The operational risk strategy should be 
current and reflect material changes to the internal and external environment. Risk reporting 
should provide a clear understanding of the key operational risks, the related drivers and the 
effectiveness of the internal controls. The internal reporting framework should include regular 
reporting of relevant information at all levels of the bank, be transparent, responsive to 
changes, appropriate and support the proactive management of operational risk.  
Industry trends and practices 
9. 
In July 2009, the Committee published two papers providing current information on 
the operational risk data and practices of institutions implementing Basel II, The 2008 Loss 
Data Collection Exercise (LDCE Paper) and the Observed range of practice in key elements 
of the Advanced Measurement Approaches (AMA) (Range of Practice Paper).2 These 
papers were designed to advance SIGOR’s goal of promoting consistency in implementation 
of the Basel II Framework by furthering the understanding of both supervisors and 
participating banking institutions regarding outstanding operational risk implementation 
issues, as well as to foster consistency in addressing these issues across regions.  
                                                
10. 
The LDCE was the first international loss data collection effort to collect information 
on all four data elements that are used in the AMA. The main findings of the LDCE Paper 
were: 
(a) 
Overall, banks have made considerable progress in the collection and use of 
internal loss data since the previous international LDCE, conducted in 2002;  
(b) 
The frequency of internal losses of €20,000 or more varies significantly across 
regions when the data are scaled by various exposure indicators; 
(d) 
Despite the regional variation in loss frequency noted above, there is some 
consistency in the severity distribution of operational losses across regions; 
 
2 
These papers are available at www.bis.org/publ/bcbs160.htm. 
2 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
(e) 
Most banks' scenario data extends the tail of the loss distribution beyond the point at 
which they have experienced internal losses. At many banks, the number of large 
scenarios greater than €10 million is approximately 20 times larger than the number 
of internal losses that are greater than this amount; 
(f) 
Although the number of large scenarios significantly exceeds the number of large 
internal losses, the frequency of large losses implied by scenarios and internal data 
are broadly consistent among AMA banks; 
(g) 
AMA banks have a higher frequency of internal losses greater than €100,000 than 
non-AMA banks, even when the data are scaled by exposure indicators. Some of 
this difference may be explained by the fact that AMA banks are generally larger 
and more complex, with more mature processes for collecting loss data; and 
(h) 
Operational risk capital for non-AMA banks is higher than for AMA banks, regardless 
of the exposure indicator used for scaling. For the typical AMA bank, the ratio of 
operational risk capital to gross income (10.8%) is significantly below the alpha for 
the Basic Indicator Approach (BIA) (15%) and also below the range of betas for the 
Standardised Approach (TSA) (12-18%). Also, the amount of capital relative to the 
frequency of large losses is generally higher at non-AMA banks than at AMA banks.  
11. 
The second paper, the Range of Practice Paper, updates a 2006 report of the same 
name. The July 2009 Range of Practice Paper describes industry practices for some key 
areas of the governance, data and modelling components of an AMA framework. It identifies 
both emerging effective practices as well as practices that are inconsistent with supervisory 
expectations. The findings from the Range of Practice paper include:  
(a) 
The absence of definitions in the Basel II text for “gross loss” or “recoveries” and 
varying loss data collection practices among AMA banks results in differences in the 
loss amounts recorded for similar events. This practice may lead to potentially large 
differences in banks’ respective capital calculations; 
(b) 
There was a broad range of practice in the use of loss amount as the AMA input. 
Most of the 42 participating AMA banks (43%) used “gross loss after all recoveries” 
(except insurance). “Gross loss before any recoveries” was used by 29%. Other loss 
amounts used by participating banks include “net loss” (14%) and “other definition” 
(12%); 
(d) 
Data collection thresholds vary widely across institutions and types of activity. A 
bank should be aware of the impact that its choice of thresholds has on operational 
risk capital computations; 
(e) 
There is a broad range of practice for when the loss amounts from legal events are 
used as a direct input into the model quantifying operational capital, which raises 
questions of transparency and industry consistency in how these operational risk 
exposures are quantified for capital purposes; 
(f) 
There is considerable diversity across banks in the choice of granularity of their 
models that may be driven as much by modeller’s preferences as by actual 
differences in operational risk profiles; 
(g) 
While it is common for banks to use the Poisson distribution for estimating 
frequency, there are significant differences in the way banks model severity, 
including the choice of severity distribution; and 
(h) 
The combination and weighting of the four elements is a significant issue for many 
banks, given the many possible combination techniques. This is an area where the 
range of practices is particularly broad both within and across jurisdictions. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
3
 
 
 
12. 
This paper addresses issues identified in the Range of Practice paper and includes 
below brief summaries of the papers produced as a result. Complete versions of the papers 
can be found in the subsequent pages.  
Governance 
13. 
Although operational risk management is an evolving risk discipline, a variety of 
practices have developed in several areas of internal governance, particularly in the 
governance structure used to manage operational risk.3 A bank’s risk governance structure 
should be appropriate for its size and business complexity. The governance structure 
adopted by many banks relies on three lines of defence – business line management, 
independent 
corporate 
operational 
risk 
function, 
and 
independent 
review. 
The 
implementation of these three lines of defence varies depending on a bank’s risk 
management approach and the flexibility provided by national supervisors. 
Verification and validation 
14. 
Independent validation and verification are components of the third line of defence in 
the governance structure used to manage operational risk, and serve as a challenge function 
to the other two lines of defence. The effectiveness of both the Corporate Operational Risk 
Management Function (CORF) and operational risk measurement system (ORMS) should be 
reviewed by appropriately qualified independent internal or external auditors, qualified 
external and/or other independent parties. The purpose of these activities is to ensure that a 
bank’s operational risk management framework (ORMF) is functioning as intended and that it 
remains appropriate for the bank’s risk profile. The existence of such an independent 
challenge process is central to the establishment and implementation of an effective overall 
ORMF. Verification and validation activities should encompass all of the components of the 
bank’s ORMF and ORMS. The depth and extent of the validation and verification efforts 
should be consistent with the materiality and complexity of the risk being managed. 
15. 
Validation ensures that the ORMS used by the bank is sufficiently robust and 
provides assurance of the integrity of inputs, assumptions, process and outputs. Specifically, 
the independent validation process should provide enhanced assurance that the risk 
measurement methodology results in a credible estimate of operational risk capital that 
reflects the operational risk profile of the bank. The work of internal validation is not limited to 
quantitative aspects; it covers validation of data inputs, methodology and use of outputs of 
operational risk models.  
16. 
Verification of the ORMF is performed on a periodic basis and is typically conducted 
by the bank's internal and/or external audit, but may involve other suitably qualified 
independent parties from external sources. Verification activities test the effectiveness of the 
overall ORMF, consistent with policies approved by the board of directors, and also test 
ORMS validation processes to ensure they are independent and are implemented in a 
manner consistent with established bank policies. 
                                                
3 
See the Committee’s Principles for enhancing corporate governance (October 2010), which is available at 
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs176.htm.  
4 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
Use test and experience 
17. 
A bank may use various approaches to articulate and demonstrate the integrated 
use of its ORMF. The integrated framework should be updated regularly and evolve as the 
bank gains more experience in the management and quantification of operational risk. The 
level to which the broader ORMF processes and practices have been embedded at all 
organisational levels across a bank is referred to as “embeddedness”. In addition to the initial 
period required by supervisors as part of their use and embeddedness AMA assessment, the 
requirement is ongoing and banks will need to ensure that their ability to demonstrate 
embeddedness is not adversely impacted over time by change.  
18. 
A bank should have sustainable and embedded ORMFs and policies that are used 
in its risk management decision-making practices, with clear evidence of the integration and 
linkage between the measurement and management processes of the ORMF through the 
entire institution. The ORMF should be updated on a regular basis and become more 
embedded as the operational risk discipline further evolves. First, the strategic and business 
planning processes should consider a bank’s operational risk profile, including the outputs of 
the ORMS. Second, a bank’s board should endorse a clear statement of appetite and 
tolerance for operational risk and the bank should have adequate processes in place to 
monitor identified controls, ensuring that they are appropriate to mitigate the identified risks 
to the desired residual level and operating effectively. Next, business entity/unit management 
must be able to clearly demonstrate how the ORMF is implemented within the business 
entity/unit, including how specific procedures and processes have been used to facilitate 
implementation, validation and verification of the ORMF elements, and integration into the 
decision-making processes. In addition, a bank’s operational risk profile should reflect both 
the internal and external environment. Risk reporting should provide a clear understanding of 
the key operational risks, the related drivers, and the effectiveness of risk management. The 
internal reporting framework should include regular reporting of relevant information at all 
levels of the bank. The internal reporting framework should be transparent, responsive to 
changes, appropriate, and support the proactive management of operational risk. Finally, 
performance management criteria in relation to ORMS elements and outputs should be 
established. 
Data 
19. 
The nature and quality of operational risk data collected by an AMA bank affects not 
only the outcome of the bank’s quantification process but also its operational risk 
management decisions. As a result, Basel II prescribes certain guidelines a bank’s 
operational risk data should satisfy before the bank will qualify for an AMA. These standards 
relate principally to the characteristics of the data, how data is collected and how it is used. 
The purpose of the standards is to provide insight into supervisors’ minimum expectations 
regarding data integrity and comprehensiveness, both of which are critical to the effective 
implementation of an AMA. 
20. 
AMA operational risk data can be grouped into the following four categories: (1) 
internal loss data, (2) external data, (3) scenario data and data related to a bank’s business 
environment and (4) internal controls. AMA operational risk data has multiple functions, 
including risk quantification, risk management, accounting and other forms of reporting. 
Some data are suitable for more than one application. To maintain consistency, a bank 
should develop data policies and procedures that include, for example, guidelines around 
perimeter of application, minimum observation period, reference date, de minimis modelling 
thresholds, and data treatment. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
5
 
 
 
Gross loss definition 
21. 
An operational risk loss can only arise from an operational risk event. The scope of 
operational risk loss refers to the type of events, whether or not having an impact on the 
financial statement, to be included in the operational risk database, and the purposes for 
which they are included (eg for management and/or measurement purposes).  
22. 
A gross loss is a loss before recoveries of any type. Net loss is defined as the loss 
after taking into account the impact of recovery. A recovery is an independent occurrence, 
related to the original loss event, separate in time, in which funds or outflows of economic 
benefits are received from a third party. For an operational risk event, a bank should be able 
to identify gross loss, recoveries and any insurance recoveries.  
Gross versus net internal loss amounts 
23. 
A broad range of practice in the use of gross or net internal loss amount as input for 
AMA models was identified in the July 2009 Range of Practice paper. A more consistent 
practice with regard to this topic can reduce differences in the capital requirement for similar 
events. An AMA bank should have robust processes to collect operational risk losses based 
on clear and consistent definitions of “gross loss” and “recoveries”. 
24. 
A bank may use “gross loss amount” or “gross loss amount after all recoveries 
(except insurance)” as input for its AMA models. The bank should demonstrate to its relevant 
supervisors that its choice is appropriate and should not use losses net of insurance 
recoveries as an input for AMA models. There are particular concerns regarding the 
difficulties this choice could introduce in the calculation of the potential maximum 20% capital 
reduction allowed for insurance mitigation according to the Basel II framework.  
Loss data thresholds 
25. 
The internal loss data threshold is a supervisory requirement that may influence 
both the management and measurement of operational risk. The Range of Practice paper 
indicated considerable variation in data collection thresholds vary across banks. Ideally, 
internal loss collection thresholds are based on statistical evidence showing that losses 
below the threshold have an immaterial impact on capital calculations. In any case, a bank 
should be aware of the impact of its thresholds on capital. 
26. 
A bank is responsible for defining and justifying appropriate thresholds for each 
operational risk class (both for data collection and modelling) and may use different 
thresholds for data collection and modelling. Thresholds should be reasonable and should 
not omit operational loss event data that are material for operational risk exposure and for 
effective risk management. The choice of threshold for modelling should not adversely 
impact the credibility and accuracy of the operational risk measures. 
Date of internal losses  
27. 
Banks generally have several reference dates that can be captured for any 
individual operational loss, including date of occurrence, date of discovery, date of contingent 
liability, date of accounting (first financial impact), and date of settlement. The collection of 
numerous dates does not represent an issue from an operational risk management 
perspective, as each reference date potentially offers different information on the 
characteristics of each loss. However, supervisors are concerned that AMA banks could 
select a reference date for quantification that results in the omission of large internal losses, 
which can have a significant impact on the bank’s operational risk capital charge at a given 
6 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
point in time, and over time. Because of the potential for material differences in capital 
requirement levels for similar risk exposures, supervisors are encouraging convergence of 
practice in how losses are treated and recorded as operational risk loss events.  
28. 
An AMA bank may use any of the reference dates (occurrence date, discovery date, 
contingent liability date or accounting date) for building its calculation dataset, and for 
meeting minimum observation period requirements, as long as material loss data is not 
omitted.  
29. 
When collecting data, banks typically gather information from at least three 
reference dates: occurrence date, discovery date and accounting date. The discovery date or 
accounting date are the most prudent choices for developing a bank’s dataset for the 
quantification of the operational risk capital requirements related to that event. However, 
institutions may use occurrence date for building the calculation dataset if the institution has 
not constrained or limited the observation period (ie five years).  
Grouped losses 
30. 
Banks sometimes group a number of losses and treat the group as a single loss for 
recording, management or modelling purposes. Depending on the reasons for grouping 
losses, the following different guidelines apply: 
(a) 
Losses caused by a common operational loss event should be grouped and entered 
into the loss calculation dataset as a single loss, unless a bank chooses to model 
causality or dependence among those losses in a different manner. A bank’s 
internal loss data policy should establish guidelines for deciding the circumstances, 
types of data and methodology for grouping data as appropriate for their business, 
risk management and capital modelling needs. A bank should also clarify and 
document its individual judgments in applying these guidelines. The bank’s policy 
regarding the threshold and dates for single losses should also be applied to 
grouped losses; 
(b) 
A bank that groups small losses with no causal relations for data collection and 
registration purposes should generally exclude them from their calculation dataset. 
When they do include them in their calculation dataset, they should demonstrate 
that the use of this type of grouped losses does not materially distort the capital 
calculation.  
Modelling 
31. 
The flexibility provided in the AMA reflects both the evolving nature of the 
operational risk discipline as well as the desire of the Basel Committee to explore how best 
to obtain risk sensitive estimates of operational risk exposure. While the industry has made 
significant progress in modelling operational risk, the range of practice continues to be broad, 
with a diversity of modelling approaches being adopted by AMA banks. These differences in 
modelling approaches, whether reflected in different correlation estimates, distributional 
assumptions, or other critical features of the model, clearly affect the AMA methodology of 
individual banks and, ultimately, the amount of capital resulting from the application of the 
AMA. 
32. 
Decisions made by the bank on the critical features of its AMA model should be 
supported by quantitative and qualitative analysis and appropriately reflect the operational 
risk profile of the bank. While flexibility allows modelling to reflect individual bank risk profiles, 
it also raises the possibility that banks with similar risk profiles could hold different levels of 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
7
 
 
 
capital under the AMA if they rely on substantially different modelling approaches and 
assumptions. 
Granularity 
33. 
Due to the nature and diversity of operational risk across an institution, a bank 
should define its operational risk categories (ORC). A bank’s risk measurement system and 
capital charge calculation is greatly influenced by the number of ORCs used within the 
model. There is currently a great variation both in the choice and the number of ORCs used 
by banks. While it is important that a bank’s ORCs reflect the unique nature of its business 
models and risk profiles, the Committee also aims to ensure that banks use comparable 
standards when selecting ORCs for modelling operational risk.  
Distributional assumptions 
34. 
Distributional assumptions underpin most, if not all, operational risk modelling 
approaches and are generally made for both the frequency and severity of operational risk 
loss events. One of the considerations in a bank’s choice of distributions is the existence and 
size of the threshold above which data are captured and modelled. 
35. 
A bank should have a policy that identifies when a loss or an event recorded in the 
internal (or external) loss event database is also to be included in the calculation dataset. 
Exceptions to the policy should be limited. In addition, the bank should follow a well 
specified, documented and traceable process for the selection, update and review of 
probability distributions and the estimate of its parameters. This process should lead to 
consistent and clear choices and be mainly finalised to properly capture the risk profile in the 
tail. Finally the techniques to determine the aggregated loss distributions should ensure 
adequate levels of precision and stability of the risk measures. The risk measures should be 
monotonic, reasonable and be supplemented with information on their level of accuracy. 
36. 
Although the technicalities of AMA models predominantly based on scenario 
analysis (Scenario Based Approaches, or SBA) differ from those of AMA models 
predominantly based on loss data (loss distribution approach, or LDA), a few supervisory 
expectations and points of attention can be raised in order to make the identification of 
distributions in the SBA and LDA processes more consistent with each other. Many observed 
SBA models do not apply statistical inference to raw scenario data; very often the curves are 
predetermined and the scenario data are used only to estimate the parameters of those 
distributions.4 Under such a process, the scenario data risks being distorted by an 
inappropriate choice of distribution. A bank should thus ensure that the loss distribution(s) 
chosen to model scenario analysis estimates adequately represent(s) its risk profile.5 
Correlation and dependence 
37. 
Dependence modelling for operational risk is an evolving area, with banks pursuing 
various approaches for incorporating dependence effects. At the same time, the choice of 
                                                
4  In fact, many banks use the same curve for modelling the severity of the scenario data across all ORCs, 
regardless of its business, size and complexity. The selection of a single curve across ORCs implies the only 
admissible driver of variation in the operational risk exposure lies in the scenario driven parameter estimates 
of the chosen distribution. 
5  In doing so, banks should also consider the potential differences with an LDA in terms of level of granularity 
and dependence across the ORCs. 
8 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
dependence approach can have a significant impact on the capital requirements generated 
by the model. The results of the LDCE and Range of Practice Papers indicate significant 
differences in banks’ approaches to modelling dependence.  
38. 
Dependence assumptions should be supported to the greatest extent possible by an 
appropriate combination of empirical data analysis and expert judgment. Assumptions 
regarding dependence should be conservative given the uncertainties surrounding 
dependence modelling for operational risk. The degree of conservatism should increase as 
the rigor of the dependence model and the reliability of the resulting capital requirements 
estimates decrease.  
39. 
Dependence should not be inappropriately affected by the choice of granularity. 
Moreover, a bank should perform sensitivity analyses and stress testing (eg different 
parameter values, different correlation models) on the effect of alternative dependence 
assumptions on its operational risk capital charge estimate.  
Use of the four data elements 
40. 
An AMA for calculating the operational risk capital charge of a bank requires the use 
of four data elements which are: (1) internal loss data (ILD); (2) external data (ED); 
(3) scenario analysis (SBA) and (4) business environment and internal control factors 
(BEICFs). The Basel II Framework anticipated that there would be a need for different 
“combinations” of the data elements depending on the behaviour of the loss generating 
process. It places the onus on a bank to illustrate that the combination of the four data 
elements is sufficient for the purpose of estimating high percentiles.  
41. 
The Committee therefore recognises that there will be jurisdictional differences in 
the use of the four data elements because of the quantity and relevance of the available loss 
data and different emphasis in the regulatory assessment of quantitative methodologies. 
Nevertheless, a number of key issues have been identified that are crucial to the successful 
implementation of an AMA: 
(a) 
Internal Loss Data (ILD) - The Committee expects that the inputs to the AMA model 
are based on data that represent or reflect the bank’s business risk profile and risk 
management practices. It expects ILD to be used in the ORMS to assist in the 
estimation of loss frequencies, to inform the severity distribution(s) to the extent 
possible and to serve as an input into scenario analysis. 
(b) 
External Data (ED) - The Committee expects ED to be used in the estimation of loss 
severity as such data contain valuable information to inform the tail of the loss 
distribution(s). ED is also an essential input into scenario analysis. Banks may 
choose to source ED from a public database, from a consortium where members 
submit their loss information, or from other means such as collecting relevant ED 
themselves. 
(c) 
Scenario Analysis – A robust scenario analysis framework is an important part of the 
ORMF in order to produce reliable scenario outputs which form part of the input into 
the AMA model. The Committee acknowledges that the scenario process is 
qualitative and that the output from a scenario process necessarily contains 
significant uncertainties. This uncertainty, together with the uncertainty from the 
other elements, should be reflected in the output of the model producing a range for 
the capital estimate. The Committee recognises that quantifying the uncertainty 
arising from scenario biases poses significant challenge and is an area requiring 
further research. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
9
 
 
 
(d) 
BEICFS – Incorporating BEICFs directly into the capital model poses challenges 
given the subjectivity and structure of BEICF tools. The Committee has observed 
that BEICFs are widely used as an indirect input into the quantification framework 
and as an ex post adjustment to model output.  
42. 
There are a variety of ways that an AMA model can be constructed to use the four 
data elements. A bank should carefully consider how the data elements are combined and 
used to ensure that the bank’s level of operational risk capital is commensurate with the level 
of risk to which it is exposed. A bank should provide a clearly articulated rationale for its 
modelling choices and assumptions and conduct sufficient research and analysis that 
support these decisions. The Committee recognises that operational risk modelling continues 
to evolve and encourages further investigation into the combination of the four data elements 
within AMA models.  
10 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
Governance 
Verification and validation 
43. 
The Basel Committee has actively promoted the adoption and implementation of 
sound corporate governance practices by banks. The effective management of operational 
risk has always been a fundamental element of banks’ risk management programmes. 
However, the Basel II Framework introduced a new dimension in the form of separate capital 
requirements for operational risk, and expectations for the management of operational risk as 
a distinctive risk discipline.  
44. 
The governance structure commonly adopted by banks for their operational risk 
discipline relies on three lines of defence: business line management, an independent 
corporate 
operational 
risk 
management 
function 
and 
independent 
review. 
The 
implementation of these three lines of defence varies depending on a bank’s risk 
management approach and the flexibility provided by national supervisors. 
45. 
Independent validation and verification are components of the third line of defence in 
the governance structure used to manage operational risk, and serve as a challenge function 
to the other two lines of defence. This section provides additional supervisory guidelines 
associated with the verification and validation of an AMA framework. While this issue is 
highly relevant to an AMA bank, information about verification and validation activities is 
beneficial to banks using the Basic Indicator Approach and The Standardised 
Approaches as they enhance their operational risk management processes. 
Background 
46. 
The Basel II Framework requires banks to develop an operational risk management 
framework. The ORMF consists of a bank’s: 
(a) 
risk organisational and governance structure;  
(b) 
policies, procedures and processes; 
(c) 
systems used by a bank in identifying, measuring, monitoring, controlling and 
mitigating operational risk; and  
(d) 
operational risk measurement system. 
47. 
A bank’s ORMS consists of the systems and data used to measure operational risk 
in order to estimate the operational risk capital charge. The ORMS must be closely 
integrated into the day-to-day risk management processes of the bank. 
48. 
Figure 1 below illustrates the relationship between an ORMF and an ORMS. 
49. 
Validation and verification activities comprise the bank’s challenge processes that 
provide independent assessments of ORMF and ORMS effectiveness, and should 
incorporate both qualitative and quantitative approaches. The effectiveness of the ORMF and 
ORMS should be reviewed by independent internal or external auditors and/or other 
independent parties. The purpose of these activities is to ensure that a bank’s ORMF is 
functioning as intended and that it remains appropriate for the bank’s risk profile. An 
independent challenge process is central to the establishment of an effective overall ORMF. 
Verification and validation activities should encompass all components of the bank’s ORMF. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
11
 
 
 
The depth and extent of validation and verification efforts should be consistent with the 
materiality and complexity of the risk being managed. 
Figure 1: Relationship between an ORMF and an ORMS 
ORMF
ORMF
ORMS
ORMS
Organization Structure
Processes
Policies & Procedures
Governance
Validation
Verification
System
Data
AMA Capital
Outcomes
Methodologies, Policies, Processes & Governance
ORMF
ORMF
ORMS
ORMS
Organization Structure
Processes
Policies & Procedures
Governance
Validation
Verification
Verification
System
Data
System
Data
AMA Capital
Outcomes
Methodologies, Policies, Processes & Governance
 
50. 
Paragraph 666 (f) of the Basel II Framework broadly addresses the subtle 
differences between sound verification and validation activities. Verification activities, such as 
credible and effective challenge functions, ensure that the ORMF, including the ORMS, is 
well-designed, effectively implemented, operating in a satisfactory manner, consistent with 
bank policies and procedures, and meets regulatory requirements. Validation activities tend 
to be more explicit and quantitative, consisting of activities that ensure processes and data 
flows associated with the ORMS are credible, transparent, well-documented and verifiable 
(paragraph 669 (f)). 
(a) 
Verification of the ORMF is done on a periodic basis and is typically conducted by 
the bank's internal and/or external audit, but may involve other suitably qualified 
independent parties from external sources. Verification activities test the 
effectiveness of the overall ORMF, consistent with policies approved by the board of 
directors, and also test ORMS validation processes to ensure they are independent 
and implemented in a manner consistent with established bank policies. 
(b) 
Validation ensures that the ORMS used by the bank is sufficiently robust and 
provides assurance of the integrity of inputs, assumptions, processes and outputs. 
Specifically, the independent validation process should provide enhanced assurance 
that the risk measurement methodology results in an operational risk capital charge 
12 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
that credibly reflects the operational risk profile of the bank. In addition to the 
quantitative aspects of internal validation, the validation of data inputs, methodology 
and outputs of operational risk models is important to the overall process. 
General observations  
51. 
Verification and validation are fundamental components of the AMA. Their activities 
are both qualitative and quantitative in nature, and consist of inspection, observation, inquiry 
and confirmation (testing), computation and analytical exercises. Effective verification and 
validation activities serve as credible and effective challenge functions to ensure the 
reliability of the overall ORMF and identify where the framework can be improved. The 
requirement to estimate the operational risk capital charge in AMA models highlights the 
importance of an effective validation process. The validation process of the ORMS should 
provide enhanced assurance that the measurement methodology results in an operational 
risk capital charge that credibly reflects the operational risk profile of the bank. Furthermore, 
the AMA model should provide the bank’s board of directors and senior management with 
necessary information to understand and effectively manage operational risk exposures as 
well as the overall ORMF. 
52. 
For these reasons, the bank should establish validation and verification processes to 
ensure its model and ORMF operate as intended. These activities should enhance the 
degree of confidence of stakeholders in the bank’s AMA framework.  
53. 
Sound validation and verification activities present banks with important challenges:  
(a) 
A bank must develop and maintain rigorous procedures for independent validation 
and verification of the ORMS and ORMF. Individuals performing the assessments 
should be competent and appropriately trained. They should be independent, 
meaning they cannot influence the development, implementation and operation of 
the AMA framework. In addition, they may not be part of the corporate operational 
risk management function. Banks face challenges finding skilled independent staff 
that meet these criteria to perform validation and verification activities. 
(b) 
Conventional validation schemes and procedures may be inadequate for the 
validation of AMA models, thereby requiring a bank to develop new procedures. This 
challenge may arise from the limited scope of the definition of validation, fragmented 
or overlapping responsibilities for development and deployment of AMA models and 
lack of actual independence.  
(c) 
The scarcity of operational loss data and the ongoing development of AMA models 
continues to be a challenge for banks 
Supervisory guidelines 
54. 
A bank should establish clear and measurable objectives for its verification and 
validation activities. Verification and validation activities should consider, on an ongoing 
basis, whether the ORMF and ORMS are appropriate. Verification and validation activities 
should also provide an effective challenge that questions existing processes and information, 
while conducting specific testing of procedures and processes, consistent with the unique 
aspects of the bank’s ORMF, ORMS and risk profile. There is no single method that is 
universally accepted by supervisors.  
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
13
 
 
 
55. 
Verification of the ORMF includes testing whether all material aspects of the ORMF 
have been implemented effectively, remain appropriate, and are performing as intended. 
Activities6 should ensure that:  
(a) 
Policies, processes, procedures and systems that comprise the bank’s ORMF, 
including the ORMS, are conceptually sound, transparent and documented; 
(b) 
Business unit activities, the independent corporate operational risk management 
function and operational risk management governance committees and structures 
are effective and appropriate; 
(c) 
ORMF inputs and outputs are accurate, complete, credible, relevant, authorised and 
accessible; 
(d) 
Risk monitoring and management of the accuracy and soundness of all significant 
processes and systems are effective;  
(e) 
Appropriate remediation is undertaken if deficiencies are identified;  
(f) 
Outcome analysis is incorporated into bank processes, as appropriate, and is 
effective (outcome analysis includes comparisons of data elements such as a 
comparison of BEICFs with actual loss experience, or a comparison of scenario 
results with internal loss data and external data); 
(g) 
Validation processes are satisfactory. The verification function should ensure that 
validation of AMA models is completed in accordance with the bank’s model 
validation policy; 
(h) 
Tests of operational risk management controls determine whether they are designed 
to prevent or detect and correct material deviations from or non-compliance with the 
policies, procedures and processes and operate effectively throughout the period 
being reviewed;  
(i) 
Every significant activity and division, subsidiary or other component of the bank is 
included; and 
(j) 
There is a periodic independent review of the AMA framework.  
56. 
The validation activity is designed to provide a reasoned and well-informed opinion 
of whether AMA models work as predicted, and whether their results (capital requirement 
estimates and other information produced by the ORMS) are suitable for their various 
internal and supervisory purposes. Validation activities should: 
(a) 
Have a broad scope, evaluating all relevant items of the ORMS, such as: 
 
Distributional assumptions; 
 
Correlation assumptions; 
 
Documentation; 
 
The four elements of the AMA 
 
Qualitative aspects (including the internal controls, use test, reporting, role of senior 
management and organisational aspects); 
                                                
6  Supervisory expectations for the internal audit activities are more broadly identified in the Basel papers A 
Framework for Internal Control Systems in Banking Organisations (BCBS, September 1998) and Internal audit 
in banks and the supervisor’s relationship with auditors (BCBS, August 2001). The enumeration here identifies 
supervisory expectations specifically for the AMA context. 
14 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
 
Technological environment relating to the computational processes; and 
 
Procedures for the approval and use of new and modified estimation models or 
methodologies (such procedures should seek explicit opinion from the validation 
function in the approval process); 
(b) 
Evaluate the bank’s processes for escalating issues identified during validation 
reviews to ensure that:  
 
Escalation processes are sufficiently comprehensive; 
 
All significant ORMS concerns are appropriately considered and acted upon by 
senior management; and  
 
All significant ORMS concerns are escalated to appropriate governance committees; 
(c) 
Evaluate the conceptual soundness – including benchmarking and outcome 
analysis – of the ORMS and of the modelling output;  
(d) 
Reflect policies and procedures to ensure that model validation efforts are 
consistent with board and senior management expectations.  
(e) 
Assess whether policies and procedures are sufficiently comprehensive to address 
critical elements of the validation process. These include independent review; 
clearly defined responsibilities for model development and validation; model 
documentation; validation procedures and frequency; and audit oversight; and  
(f) 
Confirm that the relationship between the model’s inputs and outputs are stable and 
that the techniques underlying the model are transparent and intuitive. 
Organisational aspects 
57. 
The organisational structure of the verification process will vary depending on the 
size, complexity and operational risk profile of the bank. Verification activities may be carried 
out by qualified external parties and/or internal or external audit, if independent of the 
process or system being reviewed.  
58. 
The validation function should generally be carried out internally by qualified 
validation resources. However, supervisors recognise that this may present a challenge for 
some banks.  
59. 
 While the outsourcing of verification and validation work is acceptable, the board 
and senior management are accountable for ensuring that outsourced functions are 
completed in a manner consistent with the bank’s overall verification and validation plan.  
Essential elements 
60. 
Independence: The bank’s verification and validation functions should provide 
independent assessments and opinions, while avoiding improper influence from those units 
being reviewed. Personnel conducting verification and validation work should not be involved 
in the development, implementation or operation of the ORMF or ORMS processes or 
systems being reviewed, or be subordinate to the units under review. Bank staff performing 
the verification and validation should be impartial and prepared to challenge management’s 
views and conclusions regarding any aspect of the AMA framework. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
15
 
 
 
61. 
Capacity: Verification and validation functions should be adequately staffed and 
have reasonable access of resources to perform their duties. The board and senior 
management are responsible for ensuring that these functions are adequately staffed. 
62. 
Professional Competence and Due Care: Bank staff performing verification and 
validation work should be technically competent, appropriately trained and possess the 
appropriate skills. 
63. 
Critical Analysis: Verification and validation functions should critically analyse all 
relevant information by questioning the work of the units involved in the design of the ORMF 
and ORMS. 
Work plan  
64. 
A bank should have a broad strategic plan that governs the verification and 
validation of its ORMF and ORMS. The plan should be approved by the appropriate audit or 
operational risk committee and should incorporate all relevant business units. The plans 
should ensure that the bank’s ORMF and ORMS are independently reviewed. In addition, the 
bank should develop more detailed annual plans which state the purpose and tasks to be 
carried out during upcoming years.  
65. 
The nature, timing and extent of work performed each year should provide a 
sufficient indication as to whether the bank’s ORMF and ORMS: (i) function appropriately, (ii) 
are consistent with bank policies and (iii) are free of material weaknesses. The frequency 
with which policies, processes and systems within the bank’s AMA framework is reviewed 
should be based on risk and significance. 
66. 
Independent review plans, including procedures that will be used to test the ORMS 
and ORMF, should provide for the following expectations: 
(a) 
Independent review with respect to development, implementation and operation; 
(b) 
Explicit documentation requirements for major processes and systems;  
(c) 
Unlimited access to information; 
(d) 
The nature, timing and extent of planned assessment procedures; 
(e) 
Follow up on outstanding items from previous reviews; 
(f) 
Frequency of the independent review; and  
(g) 
Audit involvement or oversight over independent review work performed by third 
parties. 
Verification and validation work plans should cover, at a minimum, the areas outlined above. 
Reporting  
67. 
Results from verification and validation work should be documented and distributed 
to appropriate business line management, internal audit, the corporate operational risk 
management function and appropriate risk committees. Bank staff ultimately responsible for 
the validated units should have access to, and an understanding of, these results.  
68. 
Reporting should include underlying processes to resolve deficiencies and 
weaknesses, ensuring that corrective actions are implemented in a timely manner. Internal 
audit should evaluate management’s response to significant findings. 
16 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
69. 
Board Reporting: Results of verification and validation reviews (including senior 
management’s attestation) should be summarised and reported annually (or periodically, as 
appropriate) to the bank’s board of directors, or a committee thereof, for approval. Attestation 
by senior management entails review and approval of the effectiveness of the bank’s ORMF 
and states that the ORMF, including the ORMS, is working appropriately. 
70. 
Monitoring/Periodic Reporting: The verification and validation reporting should: 
(a) 
Summarise the verification and validation work done, indicate any limitations in the 
scope of work performed and detail the deviations from the plan; 
(b) 
Contain the assessment of the verification or validation teams on the essential 
elements of the area or model being reviewed (validation reports should assess the 
suitability of the model for internal use);  
(c) 
Identify weaknesses and their potential consequences, including deviation from or 
non-compliance with objective criteria, policy, procedures and Basel II Framework 
requirements; 
(d) 
Establish a corrective action plan and specific timeline for remediation as 
appropriate for significant deficiencies and weaknesses;  
(e) 
Establish a procedure to resolve disagreements between the verification and 
validation units and among the areas and units being reviewed; and 
(f) 
Be distributed, at the minimum, to the senior management, the board of directors 
and the individuals in charge of the relevant organisational units. 
Use test and experience 
71. 
Banks use various approaches in an attempt to clearly articulate and demonstrate 
the integrated use of their ORMF. This is especially the case with the use of the ORMS 
within their day-to-day decision-making practices. This section outlines the Committee’s 
expectations as to how a bank’s articulation and demonstration of its ORMF is embedded 
into decision-making practices, for the initial AMA assessment and on an on-going business-
as-usual basis. Such a demonstration should answer the questions of whether and how a 
bank uses the ORMF. The key elements of an ORMF have been described in the 
Introduction to these Supervisory Guidelines. 
Background 
72. 
A bank should continue to enhance the integrated use of its ORMF in accordance 
with paragraph 666 (b) of the Basel II Framework, “the bank’s internal operational risk 
measurement system should be closely integrated into the day-to-day risk management 
processes of the bank”. The parallel run required by certain jurisdictions at the initial AMA 
review is expected to form part of the supervisory assessment. The ORMF must be updated 
regularly and evolve as improvements in the management and quantification of operational 
risk are realised. 
General observations  
73. 
“Embeddedness” is defined as the level to which ORMF processes and practices 
have been embedded across a bank’s organisational levels. The supervisory review of 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
17
 
 
 
embeddedness entails an assessment of managerial judgment and decision making and is 
broader than a “point-in–time” assessment. Use of the ORMF in decision making over a 
sustained period provides an indication of a bank’s degree of embeddedness. The 
requirement that the bank’s internal operational risk measurement system should be closely 
integrated into the day-to-day risk management processes of the bank is ongoing and banks 
will need to ensure that their ability to demonstrate embeddedness is not adversely impacted 
over time by change. 
Supervisory guidelines 
74. 
The bank should have a sustainable and embedded ORMF in its overall risk 
management decision-making processes that clearly indicates the level of integration 
between the measurement and management processes of the ORMF throughout the entire 
institution. The ORMF, including the ORMS, should be updated on a regular basis and 
become more embedded as the operational risk discipline further evolves. 
75. 
The bank should incorporate the following guidelines in its assessment of an AMA’s 
use and embeddedness: 
(a) 
The purpose and use of an AMA should not be solely for regulatory compliance 
purposes; 
(b) 
As the bank gains experience, an AMA should reflect evolving risk management 
techniques; 
(c) 
An AMA should support and enhance the bank’s operational risk management 
policies and practices; and 
(d) 
An AMA should benefit a bank in the management and control or mitigation of 
operational risk. 
Strategic and operational business planning process 
76. 
A bank’s strategic and business planning processes should consider its operational 
risk profile, including outputs from the ORMS. Potential material changes to the operational 
risk profile resulting from strategic and business planning change should be appropriately 
reviewed, considered, reported and monitored.  
Operational risk appetite and tolerance7 
77. 
A bank’s board of directors should approve and review a clear statement of 
operational risk appetite and tolerance. Risk appetite and tolerance statements should: 
account for all relevant risks, including the bank’s current financial situation and strategic 
direction; encapsulate various risk tolerance and/or threshold levels; and detail how the 
board of directors will monitor and manage adherence to the risk appetite and tolerance 
statement. The board of directors and senior management performance assessment should 
                                                
7  ”Risk appetite” is a high level determination of how much risk a firm is willing to accept taking into account the 
risk/return attributes; it is often taken as a forward looking view of risk acceptance. ”Risk tolerance” is a more 
specific determination of the level of variation a bank is willing to accept around business objectives that is 
often considered to be the amount of risk a bank is prepared to accept. In this document the terms are used 
synonymously. 
18 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
reflect and measure adherence to the risk appetite and tolerance statement and be applied 
and monitored across all business entities. 
Control effectiveness 
78. 
The bank should have adequate processes in place to monitor the identified controls 
and ensure they are appropriate to mitigate the identified risks to the desired residual level. 
The processes should include the identification, review, escalation and remediation of the 
issues identified.  
79. 
The ORMS elements should provide a key input into the assessment and ongoing 
monitoring of the control’s effectiveness in relation to the risk appetite and tolerance 
statement. For example, during the stressing of the control environment in a scenario 
workshop (as a result of a loss event or from monitoring of indicators), weaknesses within the 
control environment may be detected. Additionally, the results from the ORMS elements 
should reflect the control environment. For example, a material deficiency in the control 
environment should result in a review of the relevant elements of the ORMS and the 
operational risk capital charge estimates. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
19
 
 
 
Data 
Gross loss definition 
Background 
80. 
Paragraph 673 of the Basel II Framework states that, “Aside from information on 
gross loss amounts, a bank should collect information about …any recoveries of gross loss 
amounts … The level of detail of any descriptive information should be commensurate with 
the size of the gross loss amount.” 
General observations 
81. 
The Basel II Framework does not provide specific definitions for “gross loss” and 
“recoveries” which has resulted in significant industry variation in loss data collection 
practices. While industry consortiums have provided standard definitions, the Range of 
Practice Paper identified that quantification practices for similar events among AMA banks 
remains too broad. The disparity is particularly broad in the use of gross or net loss amount 
which may be one of the causes of the significant differences in banks’ respective capital 
charge calculations. Additionally, the use of loss net of insurance and other risk mitigation 
techniques poses challenges to banks and supervisors in determining the percentage of 
insurance and other risk-mitigating offsets that are embedded in the operational risk capital 
charge calculation.8 
Supervisory guidelines 
82. 
The following guidance sets forth standards for “gross loss” and “recoveries”, 
including specific items for inclusion and/or exclusion. The guidance generally parallels 
consortia practices. Common definitions will bring more consistency to loss data collection 
and treatment for purposes of quantification. 
83. 
An operational risk loss can arise only from an actual operational risk event. Some 
operational risk events may have an impact on the financial statements of the firm while 
others are only detectable from other sources.9 Regardless of its impact on the financial 
statements, the scope of operational risk loss refers to the type of events, included in the 
operational risk database as well as the reasons for which they are included (eg for 
management and /or measurement purposes).  
Items included in or excluded from the gross loss computation 
84. 
A gross loss is a loss before recoveries of any type. Net loss is defined as the loss 
after taking into account the impact of recovery. A recovery is an independent occurrence, 
related to the original loss event, separate in time, in which funds or inflows of economic 
                                                
8  Refer to the Committee’s Recognising the risk-mitigating impact of insurance in operational risk modeling, 
October 2010. 
9  For example, managerial archives or incidents dataset. 
20 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
benefits are received from a third party.10 For an operational risk event, a bank should be 
able to discretely identify the gross loss amount as well as any recoveries and insurance 
recoveries.  
85. 
The following specific items should be included in gross loss computation. 
(a) 
Direct charges (including impairments) to the statement on comprehensive income 
and write-downs due to operational risk events. 
(b) 
Costs incurred as a consequence of the event that should include external 
expenses11 with a direct link to the operational risk event (eg legal expenses directly 
related to the event and fees paid to advisors, attorneys or suppliers) and costs of 
repair or replacement, to restore the position that was prevailing before the 
operational risk event.  
(c) 
Provisions (“reserves”); the potential operational loss impact is reflected in the 
comprehensive income statement and should be taken into account in the gross 
loss amount.  
(d) 
Pending losses stem from operational risk events with a definitive financial impact, 
which are temporarily booked in transitory and/or suspense accounts and are not 
yet reflected in the statement of comprehensive income. For instance, in some 
countries, the impact of some events (eg legal events, damage to physical assets) 
may be known and clearly identifiable before these events are recognised through 
the establishment of a reserve. Moreover, the way this reserve is established (eg the 
date of recognition) can vary across institutions or countries. ”Pending losses”, that 
are recognised to have a relevant impact, should be included in the scope of 
operational risk loss within a time period commensurate to the size and age of the 
pending item; this can be done through the recognition of their actual amount in the 
loss database or pertinent scenario analysis. 
86. 
The following specific items should be excluded from the gross loss computation. It 
should not be considered to be an exhaustive list: 
(a) 
Costs of general maintenance contracts on property, plant or equipment;  
(b) 
Internal or external expenditures to enhance the business after the operational risk 
event: upgrades, improvements, risk assessment initiatives and enhancements ; 
(c) 
Insurance premiums. 
87. 
The inclusion or exclusion of the following items depends on their nature and 
materiality.  
(a) 
Timing losses are defined as the negative economic impacts booked in an 
accounting period, due to operational risk events impacting the cash flows or 
financial statements of previous accounting periods. Timing impacts typically relate 
to the occurrence of operational risk events that result in the temporary distortion of 
                                                
10  Examples of third parties are insurers providing a settlement or other parties (for instance when there is a 
recovery of fraud loss from a perpetrator or a recovery of a misdirected transfer from the wrong beneficiary). 
11  Capture and analysis of internal costs, while not required for capital estimation, can be useful for 
understanding the risk profile and managing risk, and is encouraged. In some cases, certain expenses that do 
not represent usual or customary costs of business should be considered for inclusion in loss amounts for 
capital estimation, for example excessive bonus payments resulting from internal fraudulent or unapproved 
trading activities. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
21
 
 
 
an institution’s financial accounts (eg revenue overstatement, accounting errors and 
mark-to-market errors). While these events do not represent a true financial impact 
on the institution (net impact over time is zero), if the error continues across two or 
more accounting periods, it may represent a material misrepresentation of the 
institution’s financial statements. Material “timing losses” due to operational risk 
events that span two or more accounting periods should be included, ie full amount 
that includes make-up payments as well as penalties and interest, in the scope of 
operational risk loss when they give rise to legal events.  
(b) 
Rapidly recovered loss events are operational risk events that lead to losses 
recognised in financial statements that are recovered over a short period. For 
instance, a large internal loss is rapidly recovered when a bank transfers money to a 
wrong party but recovers all or part of the loss soon thereafter. A bank may consider 
this to be a gross loss and a recovery. However, when the recovery is made rapidly, 
the bank may consider that only the loss net of the rapid recovery constitutes an 
actual loss. When the rapid recovery is full, the event is considered to be a “near 
miss”. 
Measures of the gross loss amount  
88. 
There are different ways to measure the gross loss amount: 
(a) 
Mark-to-market: the economic impact of an operational risk loss is usually the same 
as the accounting impact when an operational risk loss affects assets or accounts 
treated on a mark-to-market basis. In such cases, the gross loss amount is the loss 
or adjustment as recognised in the comprehensive statement of income.  
(b) 
Replacement cost: the economic impact of an operational risk loss usually differs 
from the accounting impact when losses affect assets or accounts that are not 
maintained on a mark-to-market basis such as property, plant, equipment or 
intangible assets. The gross loss amount is the replacement cost of the item.12 
Replacement cost means the cost to replace an item or to restore it to its pre-loss 
condition.13,14 
Other cases  
89. 
Some items are important for risk management although they may be beyond the 
scope required for quantification. In particular, the items below can be useful for promptly 
detecting failures and errors in processes or internal control systems. These items may also 
be useful inputs for scenario analysis.  
(a) 
“Near-miss events”: operational risk events that do not lead to a loss. For 
example, an IT disruption in the trading room just outside trading hours. 
(b) 
“Operational risk gain events”: operational risk events that generate a gain. 
                                                
12  It is estimated before taking into account recoveries (such as insurance coverage, legal judgments/settlements 
or other recoveries). 
13  By coherence with item 2 related to excluded items: enhancements or upgrades should not be taken into 
account.  
14  For example, when a fully depreciated or amortised building is destroyed, the gross loss amount would be the 
replacement cost of restoring the building to its original condition at the time of the loss.  
22 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
(c) 
“Opportunity costs/lost revenues”: operational risk events that prevent 
undetermined future business from being conducted (eg unbudgeted staff costs, 
forgone revenue and project costs related to improving processes). 
Gross versus net internal loss amounts 
90. 
A broad range of practice in the use of gross or net internal loss amount as input for 
AMA models was identified in the Range of Practice Paper. A more consistent practice in this 
issue can reduce differences in the capital requirement for similar events. 
Background 
91. 
The Basel II Framework does not provide definitions for “gross loss” and 
“recoveries,” nor does it clarify whether the AMA input should be “gross loss” or “net loss”. 
Paragraph 673, states: “aside from information on gross loss amounts, a bank should collect 
information about…any recoveries of gross loss amounts… The level of detail of any 
descriptive information should be commensurate with the size of the gross loss amount.”  
92. 
The “collection of gross versus net internal loss amount” is described in the Range 
of Practice Paper. The timing of a recovery often comprises elements of the criteria banks 
use to determine whether the gross loss amount recorded in their internal loss database 
and/or used for risk measurement purposes should be net of the amount recovered. Some 
losses that are fully-recovered rapidly and, according to banks’ netting criteria, would not be 
recorded as a loss event. The nature of the underlying transaction and/or the counterparty 
may also be considered in these cases. 
93. 
Different practices among banks can result in significant differences in the “gross 
loss” amount recorded for similar events. 
94. 
The Range of Practice Paper indicated a clear supervisory concern related to the 
use of loss net of insurance recoveries as an input for AMA quantification.  
General observations 
95. 
According to the Range of Practice Paper, there was a broad range of practice in 
the use of loss amount as the AMA input. Many of the 42 participating AMA banks (43%) 
used “gross loss after all recoveries (except insurance)”. “Gross loss before any recoveries” 
was used by 29%. Other loss amounts used by participating banks include “net loss” (14%) 
and “other definition” (12%). Regionally, there were some differences as well.  
96. 
The Basel II Framework and the Committee’s document Recognising the risk-
mitigating impact of insurance in operational risk modelling outline specific requirements for 
AMA banks using insurance risk mitigation. 
Supervisory guidelines 
97. 
Considering the progress of AMA implementation, a bank should have strong 
processes to collect operational risk losses based on clear and consistent definitions of 
“gross loss” and “recoveries”. Supervisory expectations on gross loss definition and 
recoveries are treated in another section of this paper. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
23
 
 
 
98. 
Banks should follow the guidelines below on the use of internal loss amount to 
enhance consistency and harmonisation in the implementation of AMA models across 
jurisdictions.  
99. 
A bank may use “gross loss amount” or “gross loss amount after all recoveries 
(except insurance)” as an input for its AMA models and should demonstrate to its supervisor 
the rationale for this choice. Additionally, a bank should collect gross losses and recoveries 
separately and use the information for risk management purposes. 
100. 
A bank should not use loss net of insurance recoveries as an input for its AMA 
models. An approach using loss net of recoveries and insurance recoveries may prove 
especially difficult in the calculation of the maximum 20% capital requirements reduction 
permitted for insurance mitigation in the Basel II Framework and discussed in Recognising 
the risk-mitigating impact of insurance in operational risk modelling. 
101. 
A bank should use conservative data as an input for the AMA capital requirements. 
There are specific limitations and requirements for the use of risk mitigation from insurance in 
the operational risk capital charge estimation. 
102. 
Conservatism should be considered, for example, following a significant loss event, 
where a bank receives recoveries after a considerable delay. During this timing lag “gross 
loss” may represent a material impact on the statement of comprehensive income. The 
prevalent practice of “gross loss amount after all recoveries (except insurance)” as a model 
input should be rigorously challenged in these circumstances. For this kind of loss event, it 
may be more appropriate to use the “gross loss amount” even when those losses are fully 
recovered.  
103. 
The recognition of insurance in operational risk capital models is in an early stage of 
development. A bank should calculate the total operational risk capital charge gross of 
insurance recovery in order to determine the 20% limit and isolate the bank’s methodology 
for modelling insurance mitigation.15  
                                                
15  Refer to the Committee’s Recognising the risk-mitigating impact of insurance in operational risk modelling, 
October 2010. 
24 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
Internal loss data thresholds 
Background 
104. 
The Basel II Framework states in paragraph 673, that an AMA bank “must have an 
appropriate de minimis gross loss threshold for internal loss data collection, for example 
€10,000. The appropriate threshold may vary somewhat between banks and within a bank 
across business lines and/or event types. However, particular thresholds should be broadly 
consistent with those used by peer banks.”  
General observations 
105. 
The internal loss data threshold is a supervisory requirement that may influence 
both the management and measurement of operational risk. The Range of Practice Paper 
showed that data collection thresholds vary widely across banks and types of activity. Some 
banks apply high thresholds to avoid cluttering their databases with events that are judged to 
be immaterial, while others choose lower thresholds in order to obtain more information on 
their loss events.  
106. 
Ideally, internal loss data collection thresholds are based on statistical evidence 
indicating that losses below the threshold have an immaterial impact on the calculation of the 
capital charge. Threshold decisions may also take into account the cost/benefits of collecting 
data below a certain level, as well as considering the benefits of collecting the data for risk 
management purpose. In any case, a bank should be aware of the impact thresholds have 
on the capital charge.  
Supervisory guidelines 
107. 
A bank is responsible for defining and justifying appropriate thresholds for each 
operational risk class, both for data collection and modelling.  
108. 
A bank may use different thresholds for data collection and modelling. A lower 
threshold may be desirable for risk management (eg to examine credit card fraud) and 
expected loss calculation. 
109. 
A bank should examine the following points when justifying its decision:  
(a) 
Sufficiency of data for statistical modelling; 
(b) 
Ability to reconcile between accounting and loss data or demonstrate assurance of 
data quality (an elevated threshold could lead to significant gaps between the sum 
of losses in the database and the actual loss without being able to explain them); 
(c) 
Ability to calculate expected losses for each risk class; 
(d) 
Capacity to make management decisions to avoid, mitigate, transfer or take 
operational risk; and 
(e) 
Whether thresholds account for the inherent risk and complexity of the class and the 
related business (a lower threshold could be chosen for retail business due to the 
high frequency of losses).  
110. 
It should be noted that the threshold for internal loss collection processes 
corresponds to the gross loss amount. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
25
 
 
 
111. 
Thresholds for data collection and risk management should be reasonable and 
should not omit operational loss event data that are material for operational risk exposure 
and for effective risk management.  
112. 
A bank should be aware of the effect of loss data collection thresholds on the 
management of operational risk. This is especially important for a bank with high thresholds 
for data collection. 
113. 
The choice of threshold may greatly affect the manner in which operational risk is 
managed. A bank should ensure that its choice of thresholds provides a clear understanding 
of realised as well as potential operational losses.  
114. 
Data collection thresholds should capture all material losses in terms of their value. 
A bank should verify, on a regular basis, that its choice of thresholds includes all material 
operational risk losses for risk management purposes. For example, a bank may attempt to 
collect all below-threshold items for a given period and then reconcile them with accounting 
data to examine the effect of including these losses in management action.  
115. 
In the case of very high frequency losses with no causal relationships (but with 
common features16) that are below the threshold, a bank may individually collect these 
losses or group them in order to collect their aggregated amount and features for risk 
management purposes.17  
116. 
It is important to note that the €10,000 threshold mentioned in paragraph 673 of the 
Basel II Framework is merely an example of a threshold. Implementing this threshold, without 
further analysis, would not be acceptable by supervisors.  
117. 
The choice of threshold for modelling should not adversely impact the credibility and 
accuracy of the operational risk measures. 
118. 
A bank may establish a de minimis “modelling threshold” for an ORC so that the 
frequency and severity distributions in each ORC are fitted to the data only above the 
threshold.  
119. 
Use of de minimis modelling thresholds that are much higher than the data 
collection thresholds should be limited and properly justified by sensitivity analysis at various 
thresholds. Moreover, changes in the de minimis modelling thresholds, when not embedded 
in the model engine and driven by specific reasons (eg discount rates), should be limited in 
number and duly motivated by the need to better capture the risk profile of the ORC.  
120. 
All operational losses above the set de minimis modelling threshold should be 
included in the calculation dataset and used, whatever their amounts, for generating the 
regulatory measures.18 
                                                
16  For instance, amounts below the threshold related to external frauds on payment cards.  
17  See also specific recommendations in the group losses section regarding the use of this type of grouped 
losses in quantification. 
18  See the section on distributional assumptions for exceptions to this rule. 
26 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
Date of internal losses  
121. 
The Range of Practice Paper identified a broad range of approaches in the 
recognition and use of internal losses as an input for AMA modelling. While banks’ practices 
in this area tend to be heavily influenced by accounting or provisioning practices, there 
remains significant industry divergence in institutional practice that could generate results 
that are inconsistent with a bank’s actual operational risk profile. A more consistent industry 
practice should reduce differences in capital requirements for similar exposures. 
Background 
122. 
Internal loss data must link a bank’s risk estimate to actual loss experience. 
Paragraph 673 of the Basel II Framework states that “internal loss data must...capture all 
material activities and exposures …” and that “a bank should collect [descriptive] information 
about the date of the event.… [that is] commensurate with the [loss’s] size ….”. The Basel II 
Framework provides no guidance, however, on the appropriate reference date to include 
losses (including litigation-related exposures) in its dataset for quantifying operational risk 
capital requirements.  
123. 
Banks generally have several reference dates that can be captured for any 
individual operational loss, including date of occurrence, date of discovery, date of contingent 
liability (IAS 37), date of accounting (first financial impact) and date of settlement. 
124. 
By definition, litigation-related losses are considered internal operational risk losses; 
however, they differ from most internal losses because often the amounts are not entirely 
quantified and do not affect a bank until months or years after the event. In legal cases the 
sequence of dates is similar to other operational risk losses except that the date of 
accounting is sometimes considered the date when a legal reserve is established for the 
probable estimated loss in profit and loss accounts. The ultimate loss is then recorded in its 
totality on the date of settlement or agreement. 
125. 
The Range of Practice Paper demonstrated that banks have varying practices 
regarding which of these dates is used for recording legal losses in their databases and 
which are used for quantifying the operational risk capital charge. The divergence exists for 
the following reasons: (1) initial amounts claimed in lawsuits can differ significantly from the 
actual amount paid; (2) final settlement amounts can differ significantly from reserve 
estimates or initial legal judgments; or (3) institution concerns that early public recognition, or 
private disclosure to opposing legal counter-parties of internal estimates of potential 
settlements, could increase the likelihood and size of legal losses. 
General observations 
126. 
Banks currently capture several dates for an operational risk event. Because of the 
multiple dates that relate to any single event, a bank may use (one) reference date(s) for risk 
management and reporting purposes and another reference date for quantification purposes. 
The date used for quantification is critical as it is used to fulfil the minimum observation 
period envisaged by the Basel II Framework. When losses are litigation-related, the added 
reference date (ie date of settlement) can lead to further divergence. This deviation in 
practice was identified in the Range of Practice Paper, indicating that just over one-quarter of 
AMA banks use the date of establishing a legal reserve in the AMA capital charge 
calculation. Other dates used include settlement date (12%), accounting date (10%), date of 
discovery (17%), or date when first confirmed or validated (7%).  
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
27
 
 
 
Supervisory guidelines 
127. 
The collection of numerous dates does not represent a concern from an operational 
risk management perspective, as each reference date offers potentially different information 
on the characteristics of each loss. A bank should not select a reference date for 
quantification that results in the omission of large internal losses as this can have a 
significant impact on the bank’s operational risk capital charge. Due to the potential for 
material differences in capital requirement levels for similar risk exposures, supervisors are 
encouraging convergence of practice in the way losses are treated and recorded as 
operational risk loss events. This issue is particularly relevant for institutions that use the 
occurrence date to build their calculation dataset, and in regions where legal losses 
represent a material amount of all losses. 
128. 
These guidelines are designed to encourage more consistency to AMA models and 
more harmony to AMA implementation in different jurisdictions for building a calculation 
dataset. 
129. 
A bank may use any of the reference dates (occurrence date, discovery date, 
contingent liability date or accounting date) for building its calculation dataset, and for 
meeting minimum observation period requirements as long as material loss data is not 
omitted. No other dates are acceptable for building a calculation dataset. 
130. 
The building of a proper calculation dataset from available internal/external data is 
critical to the quantification of a bank’s operational risk capital charge and for accurately 
representing its operational risk profile. To maintain consistency, a bank should develop 
policies and procedures that include guidelines around the perimeter of application, minimum 
observation period, reference date, de minimis modelling thresholds and data treatment.19  
131. 
A bank should select the appropriate reference date in order to extract data from the 
internal/external database, thereby ensuring that the Basel II Framework minimum 
observation period is fulfilled. When collecting data, banks usually gather information from 
three reference dates: occurrence date, discovery date and accounting date. The discovery 
date and accounting date are the most prudent choices for developing a bank’s dataset for 
the quantification of the operational risk capital requirements related to that event. However, 
a bank may use the occurrence date for building the calculation dataset if the bank has not 
constrained or limited the observation period. Because there is often a time lag between the 
actual occurrence and discovery of an operational risk event,20 material losses could be 
excluded if the occurrence date falls outside of the time series used for the capital charge 
estimation. For this reason, a bank should carefully consider the time series used for the 
frequency and severity estimation and should incorporate an observation period that avoids 
the omission of any material loss data.  
132. 
Consistent with other operational risk losses, a bank should use a date no later than 
the date of reserve for including legal related losses/exposures as an input in its AMA model.  
133. 
Differences as to when legal losses are recognised may impact the measurement of 
operational risk exposure for similar events. Consequently a bank should follow the principle 
of conservatism when considering the inputs in its AMA model. Given the time lag between 
the legal proceeding and its conclusion, a date that is no later than the date for establishment 
                                                
19  The latter two areas are discussed in the section on distributional assumptions of this paper. 
20  Litigation-related losses result in further delay. 
28 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
of a legal reserve provides consistency and conservatism and more effectively reflects the 
bank’s operational risk profile. 
134. 
Because a legal exposure can change over time, a bank should consider alternative 
methods for the inclusion of legal events in the interim (eg through scenario analysis). That 
is, from discovery date until the date of accounting of the legal reserve, these events are 
recognised potential exposures that may potentially impact the bank’s operational risk profile. 
A bank should also implement a robust process for updating legal event exposures between 
the reserve date and settlement date. 
135. 
Consider the following example to illustrate: 
Bank X is named in an investor lawsuit claiming inadequate and misleading 
disclosure of mortgage-related losses on 4 May 2006 (discovery date). The suit asks 
for monetary damages for investment losses in the amount €5 billion. At the 
discovery date, when the bank was served with a potential exposure of €5 billion, 
legal counsel indicated that the suit had no merit, and that the likelihood of loss is 
remote. On 15 November 2008, following a review of internal documents/discovery 
the bank’s legal counsel recommends that the “least cost” would be to settle the 
case for €1 billion. As a result, the bank takes a reserve for that amount. The case is 
settled two years later (settlement date) for €2 billion.  
At the reserve date, the exposure of €1 billion is reasonably probable and it has 
been reasonably estimated. Supervisors expect the reserve amount of €1 billion to 
be reflected as a direct input into the AMA model. However, between the discovery 
date and the reserve date, legal counsel updates the probability that some 
settlement would be paid. During that time period the bank should consider 
reflecting this exposure in the capital calculation, for instance by a scenario analysis.  
Between the reserve date and settlement date, the exposure may increase or 
decrease based on the outcome of settlement negotiations. In this example, the 
settlement amount increased to €2 billion, so during the period between the reserve 
date and settlement date that bank should reflect the increased exposure in its’ AMA 
capital requirement estimation process. Alternatively, if the exposure declined to 
€500 million, the bank should reflect the decreased exposure in its’ AMA capital 
requirement estimation process. However, if the bank paid a settlement as a 
provisional execution following a court decision, only to have the decision/settlement 
overturned or reduced, the bank should reflect the paid amount as its’ gross loss 
with any reduction reflected as a recovery. 
136. 
The diverse use of dates for quantification purposes raises questions as to whether 
a bank’s operational risk profile quantification properly reflects all known operational risk 
exposures. The example above clearly illustrates that a bank that uses settlement date rather 
than accounting date may in fact omit a material exposure for an extended time period.  
137. 
Date of reserve is a sensible option for improving industry convergence because the 
loss exposure is reasonably estimated and it can be reconciled to the general ledger. 
Convergence would likely ensure that similar legal exposures across banks do not materially 
differ in the determination of a bank’s calculation dataset.  
138. 
Supervisors understand industry concerns that including legal events in the loss 
database prior to settlement may lead to an increase in the frequency and severity of legal 
settlements. Several banks continue to raise this matter contending that the loss data and 
accompanying descriptive information could be revealed through the discovery process in a 
legal proceeding, thereby increasing the likelihood and magnitude of an adverse outcome. 
However, this concern lacks credibility, as many banks have developed processes to provide 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
29
 
 
 
information on legal events that support their AMA modelling methodology without disclosing 
confidential data. As a result, a bank should capture all known legal-related exposures in its 
operational risk measurement and management systems. 
Grouped losses 
Background 
139. 
Banks sometimes group a number of losses and treat the group as a single loss for 
recording, management or modelling purposes.  
140. 
Paragraph 673 of the Basel II Framework states that “A bank must develop specific 
criteria for assigning loss data arising from related events over time,” but provides no further 
details. This section clarifies the treatment of grouped losses in models, including their dates 
and thresholds. 
General observations 
141. 
Banks group their losses for the following two reasons. 
(a) 
Situation 1: Losses caused by a common operational risk event, which may 
materialise over a period of time, are grouped together and entered into the model 
as a single loss. 
Example 1: A natural disaster causes losses in multiple locations and/or across an 
extended time period. 
Example 2: A breach of a bank’s information security results in the disclosure of 
confidential customer information. As a result, multiple customers incur fraud-related 
losses that the bank must reimburse. This is sometimes accompanied by 
remediation expenses such as credit card re-issue or credit history monitoring 
services. 
(b) 
Situation 2: Small losses with no causal relationship but with some common 
features are recorded in the database and reported to the management as one 
group. 
Example 1: Credit card fraud-related losses discovered during a given period are 
grouped together and recorded in the loss database (total number and total amount 
of losses are recorded). 
Example 2: Losses smaller than €100 that occur in a particular business line are 
grouped together and recorded in the loss database, while losses over €100 are 
treated as single events. 
142. 
Situation 1 refers to multiple losses that are treated as a single loss for modelling 
purposes. Banks typically group losses with similar underlying causes and treat them as a 
single loss in their modelling. However, the losses differ depending on varying interpretations 
of causality. Some banks use the date of the underlying cause, often assigning the date of 
the first loss in the group. Other banks (have a policy of limiting the use of internal loss data 
by age) use the latest date among the series of losses to ensure the grouped loss is not 
prematurely discarded (eg using only the internal loss data that occurred within the past 
seven years). 
30 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
143. 
Situation 2 refers to practices in which several losses are treated as a single loss for 
the purpose of loss database entries. Some banks wish to be informed of these small losses 
for risk management purposes, but they doubt cost of individually recognising and registering 
those small losses is justified. Such banks often enter these grouped losses into their models 
directly, thereby entering the grouped losses as a single loss. Some banks ungroup the 
bundled data/losses and input individual losses (eg inputting the number of grouped losses 
with their average loss amount). 
Supervisory guidelines 
144. 
Different guidelines apply for Situation 1 and Situation 2. 
Losses caused by a common operational loss event 
145. 
Losses caused by a common operational loss event should be grouped and entered 
into the calculation dataset as a single loss, unless the bank chooses to model causality or 
dependence among those losses in a different manner. 
146. 
A bank’s internal loss data policy should establish guidelines21 for deciding the 
circumstances, types of data and methodology for grouping data as appropriate for their 
business, risk management and capital charge modelling needs. They should also clarify and 
document their individual judgments in applying these guidelines. 
147. 
The bank’s policy about the threshold and dates for single losses should also be 
applied to grouped losses. 
148. 
Since the losses in this case should be treated as a single loss modelling purposes, 
the threshold should be applied to the grouped loss comprised of ostensibly single losses. As 
such, a bank should ensure its threshold is not circumvented or compromised because of 
failure to collect some of the losses that could comprise the group. 
149. 
An unacceptable example:  
Bank X sets its threshold for its modelling at €10,000 and it neither collects nor 
enters losses smaller than that amount in its internal loss database. It also has a 
policy of grouping losses together that are caused by the same underlying event.  
A natural disaster hits its three branches over a week and damages each of them, 
resulting in an €8,000 loss for each. However, each branch did not report its loss 
because its damage was below the €10,000 threshold. As a result, the loss that 
would have amounted to €24,000 in sum was not used in their risk calculation, 
although the bank has the policy of using all the losses that are greater than 
€10,000. 
150. 
To prevent such cases from occurring, internal loss data collection procedures and 
internal controls should be sufficiently robust to ensure information capture and data 
                                                
21  Examples of guidelines: 
Example 1: Several causal damages due to one typhoon that were incurred within 72 hours are treated as a 
single loss. 
Example 2: Several losses from internal frauds in the same business line by the same person are treated as a 
single loss. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
31
 
 
 
grouping consistent with the firm’s policy. Oversight, communication and assurance 
processes should ensure firm-wide understanding of the policy, information sharing 
regarding events that may have related or delayed impacts, and review processes to test the 
grouping of data for conformance with policy. The independent review function also should 
review data grouping as part of its verification activities. 
151. 
A bank should be consistent in dating these grouped losses for modelling purposes; 
that is, it should apply the same policy to single losses as it does to grouped losses.  
152. 
For a bank that limits the use of internal loss data by age (eg using only the internal 
data that occurred within the past seven years), special consideration should be taken to 
ensure that grouped losses are not discarded too early. 
153. 
If a significant time lag exists between an incident’s discovery date and the dates of 
the related grouped losses, the more recent discovered losses may not be included in the 
calculation dataset if their reference date falls outside of the bank-determined observation 
period. A more prudent practice would consider the date of the last discovered/accounted 
loss as the reference date for all the related loss events and include the related losses in the 
calculation dataset as a single loss with the severities of the individual losses added 
together. 
Losses without causal relations 
154. 
A bank that groups small losses above the threshold for modelling22 with no causal 
relations for data collection and registration purposes generally should not include them in its 
calculation dataset. If a bank chooses to include these losses in its calculation dataset, it 
should demonstrate that the use of this type of grouped losses does not materially distort the 
capital requirements calculation. 
155. 
When banks group losses in this way (ie grouping losses with no causal relations) 
and decide to enter them into their models, some banks input them as bundles of data 
points/losses. Other banks may decide to ungroup the losses that comprise the groups and 
input them individually, instead of inputting the bundles. A bank should not input bundles of 
data points that have no causal relationship as it distorts reality and lacks theoretical 
grounding. A bank that wishes to apply this grouping method should demonstrate that it does 
not materially distort the capital requirements calculation and that the model output is 
independent of the grouping methods. 
156. 
Ungrouping bundled losses may provide a bank with a dataset that more accurately 
reflects its risk profile than bundled losses. However, in most cases, a bank does not have 
information about individual losses (eg loss amounts and dates for individual losses) as the 
purpose of grouping losses is to simplify the data collection process. In these cases, the 
bank should approximate individual losses (eg inputting the number of grouped losses with 
an average loss amount assigned to each) and ensure that the effect of this approximation is 
immaterial to the calculation results. 
157. 
A bank should not circumvent or infringe its threshold by grouping losses. One such 
unacceptable example: 
                                                
22  This means that the sum of the group of losses is above the threshold, while individual losses are below the 
threshold. 
32 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
Bank Z implements a €1,000 threshold for modelling purposes. The bank groups 
"cases of minor damage to physical assets which can easily be replaced from 
inventory" that occurred during a given year and enters them as a single entry into 
its database for management purposes. This year, the losses were reported as an 
estimation of 1000 events with a total estimated amount of €50,000. Consequently, 
the bank decided that there were no losses above the modelling threshold of 
€1,000, since the average amount of losses was €50. However, the reality (not 
known to the bank) was that there were 999 cases of theft or damages with a €49 
loss and a single €1,049 theft, which was ignored. The bank should have identified 
this major loss and ensured that it was reflected in its models. 
158. 
Similar to the first example, strong governance on data collection procedures is 
essential to preventing such cases. In the example above, Bank Z’s corporate operational 
risk management function should have monitored possible events that needed grouping and 
ensured that the branches collected necessary losses. 
159. 
In both Scenario 1 and Scenario 2, special consideration of issues related to data 
grouping is required in the case of a merger. For example, when quantifying the operational 
risk of a merged bank, all the relevant losses, including those that occurred before the 
merger, with a common underlying cause should be grouped together before being input into 
the model. When this is not feasible, a bank should ensure that the effect of not doing so is 
insignificant to the quantification result. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
33
 
 
 
Modelling 
Most AMA models are currently based on either the loss distribution approach (LDA) or on 
the scenario-based approach (SBA).23 While some of the criteria and examples under this 
section are more applicable to one approach than another, the underlying principles are 
meant to be generally valid; therefore they should be applicable to any AMA method. This in 
particular holds for the “Building of the calculation dataset” and “Determination of aggregated 
loss distributions and risk measures” Sections, which are elaborated having the LDA as 
reference, but that should be applied to the maximum extent to other approaches such as the 
SBA. 
Granularity 
Background 
160. 
In accordance with paragraph 669(c) of the Basel II Framework, an AMA bank’s risk 
measurement system “must be sufficiently granular to capture the major drivers of 
operational risk affecting the shape of the tail of the loss estimates”.  
General observations 
161. 
Due to the nature and diversity of operational risk, banks define operational risk 
categories (ORC) along which they measure their operational risks. A bank’s risk 
measurement system and capital charge calculation is greatly influenced by the number of 
ORCs used within the model. There is currently considerable variation both in the choice and 
the number of ORCs used by banks. While it is important that a bank’s ORCs reflect the 
unique nature of its business models and risk profiles, the Committee also aims to ensure 
that banks use comparable standards when selecting ORCs for modelling operational risk.  
Supervisory guidelines 
162. 
When choosing their operational risk categories, a bank should take into account the 
nature and complexity of business activities and the operational risks to which they are 
exposed.  
163. 
When modelling operational risks, a bank should ensure that the model takes into 
account the bank’s idiosyncrasies. These may include the business profile, risk profile, 
history of operational losses, business environment and other factors. A bank should 
characterise operational risks along these factors. For modelling purposes, it is important that 
risks sharing common factors are grouped together.  
                                                
23  The SBA and LDA terminology referred to in this Section is used only for simplicity and does not want to 
categorise AMA models between the extremes of those based on loss data and those based on scenario 
analysis. Instead it is a well recognised fact that there is a variety of AMA models, which use all of the four 
elements (internal loss data, external data, scenario analysis, BEICFs) in different ways and with different 
emphasis. 
34 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
164. 
When a major change in the organisational or the risk profile of an institution occurs, 
the bank should ensure the choice of granularity remains valid. 
165. 
A bank should determine the optimum balance between granularity of the classes 
and volume of historical data for each class. Using one or only a few ORCs can lead to 
increased heterogeneity for the events in each category. A high number of ORCs can cause 
the number of losses in each category to fall below a model’s data threshold. As such an 
outcome is more likely for business lines where the underlying risk exposure is immaterial, 
the materiality of a business line may in effect be one of the factors determining the level of 
granularity. Supervisors should be wary when an institution uses either a very low or very 
high number of ORCs, especially when used in conjunction with a loss distribution approach 
(LDA).  
166. 
A bank should provide evidence to supervisory authorities that its choice of 
operational risk categories is reasonable and does not adversely impact other factors of the 
operational risk model, such as diversification assumptions, correlations and capital 
allocation. 
167. 
A bank should support its choice of granularity by qualitative and quantitative 
means.24 It should be particularly aware of the impact its choice of granularity has on the 
capital charge and provide evidence that the choice is reasonable. 
168. 
A high number of ORCs may lead to an unrealistically high capital charge when no 
correlations are modelled and capital charges for all ORCs are summed together. On the 
other hand, a bank modelling correlations that use a high number of ORCs might have 
difficulty finding statistical means to validate correlation assumptions due to minimal loss 
data for each ORC.  
169. 
Capital allocation to internal business lines should be a factor when choosing ORCs, 
as these ORCs may be used as part of the capital allocation process.25 When using an 
allocation method that is very different in nature from the choice of ORCs, the bank should 
ensure that its choice of ORCs and allocation method was reasonable in the first place. Note 
that changes in the ORCs need not always correspond with changes in the capital allocation 
method. For example, banks often take continuous management actions leading to changes 
in their business units that may not lead to major changes in their business processes or risk 
profile. Such changes may not justify changing the ORCs used for capital modelling, even 
though they must be incorporated in the capital allocation process.  
 
                                                
24  Where a bank uses the Basel II Event Types categorisation as ORCs, different drivers of risk may be identified 
even within a given Event Type. Usually these drivers are easy to recognise as in one case the losses are 
recurrent, occur in “business as usual” situations and their impacts is never or rarely large (for instance, 
thefts/robberies in the Event Type External Fraud); in another case they are less frequent, are due to specific 
and/or uncommon situations and their impact is from medium to large (for instance in the External Fraud 
category, large frauds due to misappropriation of assets such as pyramid or “Ponzi” schemes). In such cases, 
it is recommended that the ORC be split into pertinent subclasses in order to more correctly capture the 
different drivers of risk.  
25  For example, when using a very high or very low number of ORCs, the allocated capital charges may not have 
the desired impact on the management of operational risk. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
35
 
 
 
Distributional assumptions 
Background 
170. 
Distributional assumptions underpin most, if not all, operational risk modelling 
approaches and are generally made for both the frequency and severity of operational risk 
loss events. One of the considerations in a bank’s choice of distributions is the existence and 
size of the threshold above which data are captured and modelled. 
171. 
Paragraph 667 of the Basel II Framework states that “Given the continuing evolution 
of analytical approaches for operational risk, the Committee is not specifying the approach or 
distributional assumptions used to generate the operational risk measure for regulatory 
capital purposes. However, a bank must be able to demonstrate that its approach captures 
potentially severe ‘tail’ loss events. Whatever approach is used, a bank must demonstrate 
that its operational risk measure meets a soundness standard comparable to that of the 
internal ratings-based approach for credit risk (ie comparable to a one year holding period 
and a 99.9th percentile confidence interval).” 
172. 
Paragraph 673 of the Basel II Framework states “… A bank must have an 
appropriate de minimis gross loss threshold for internal loss data collection, for example 
€10,000. The appropriate threshold may vary somewhat between banks and within a bank 
across business lines and/or event types ….”  
General observations 
173. 
The basis of all operational risk models is a distribution of operational risk losses. 
Most banks model the frequency and severity distributions separately. These distributions 
are fitted to the “calculation dataset”, which represents the portion of gathered data, either 
actual or constructed, that fulfils the necessary conditions to serve as inputs into the AMA 
model. Such necessary conditions include perimeter of application (ie AMA compliant parts 
only, observation period, reference date, modelling threshold and data treatment). 
174. 
The Range of Practice Paper shows broad convergence in the range of distributions 
assumed to estimate the frequency of operational risk losses, with the Poisson distribution 
the most commonly used, followed by the Negative Binomial.  
175. 
Significant differences emerge, however, in the ways banks model the severity of 
operational risk losses. The wide set of selected distributions ranged from light- to heavy-
tailed curves. Some banks assume that in each ORC, the operational risk losses follow either 
a similar or different path (ie a different path for High Frequency Low Impact events (HFLI) 
and Low Frequency High Impact events (LFHI)). There are also varied approaches around 
the choice and use of modelling thresholds and the methods adopted to estimate the 
distribution parameters. These varying assumptions highlight the key sources for variation in 
the banks’ approaches and, subsequently, the calculation of their operational risk capital 
requirements. 
176. 
Convergence regarding the types of approaches and distributions used for 
modelling operational risk losses may not be achievable or desirable because the severity is 
often idiosyncratic to particular business lines or types of banks. However, it is possible to 
identify principles for determining whether the chosen approaches are inconsistent with the 
underlying data or supervisory expectations.  
177. 
The following section provides supervisory guidelines on identifying basic principles 
and pertinent criteria related to distributional assumptions. These guidelines take into 
account the current best practices in modelling operational risk. A bank should closely follow 
36 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
the evolution and development of best practices and update and improve its measurement 
system as appropriate. 
Supervisory guidelines 
Building of the calculation dataset 
178. 
A bank should have a policy that identifies when a loss or an event recorded in the 
internal (or external) loss event database is also to be included in the calculation dataset. 
This policy should provide a consistent treatment for loss data across the institution. 
Exceptions to the policy should be limited and, in any case, duly documented and properly 
addressed to prevent undue reduction of the capital charge.26 
179. 
The building of a proper calculation dataset from the available internal/external data 
requires that a bank develop policies and procedures to address its several features (ie 
perimeter of application, observation period, reference date, de minimis modelling thresholds 
and data treatment).  
180. 
The definition of “gross loss” for the purpose of building the calculation dataset 
should include all the items mentioned in Paragraphs 85 and, when applicable, 87 of these 
Guidelines. The Basel II Framework requires banks to base their internally generated 
operational risk measures on a minimum historical observation period of five years (three 
years when an institution first moves to an AMA). For certain ORCs with low frequency of 
events, an observation period greater than five years may be necessary to collect sufficient 
data to generate reliable operational risk measures and ensure that all material losses are 
included in the calculation dataset. If very long data series are used, banks will need to 
consider the heterogeneity arising from changes in the risk profile through time. In such 
cases, time trends or other adjustments should be strongly preferred to discarding older data. 
Discarding older data should be undertaken only as last resort for ORCs where loss 
experience is sparse. 
181. 
A bank may use one of the reference dates (occurrence date, discovery date, 
contingent liability date or accounting date) for building the calculation dataset, as long as 
material loss data are not omitted. No other dates are acceptable for building the calculation 
dataset. 
182. 
The discovery date or accounting date are the most prudent choices for developing 
a bank’s dataset for the quantification of operational risk capital related to that event. 
However, a bank may use the occurrence date for building the calculation dataset if the bank 
has not constrained or limited the observation period.  
183. 
A bank should use a date no later than date of reserve for including legal related 
losses/exposures in the calculation dataset.  
184. 
A bank may establish a de minimis modelling threshold for an ORC, so that 
frequency and severity distributions in each ORC are fitted to the data only in excess of the 
threshold. The de minimis modelling threshold may differ across ORCs. The choice of 
threshold for modelling should not adversely impact the credibility and accuracy of the 
operational risk measures. 
                                                
26  This guideline reiterates the guidelines outlined in the data section, as far as they are relevant for building a 
proper calculation dataset.  
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
37
 
 
 
185. 
On an exceptional basis, a bank may identify data points related to abandoned 
business lines within the calculation data. It may adopt specific techniques for the treatment 
of these data points to address an undesired effect on capital measures. However, a bank 
should justify and clearly document the identification and treatment of these data points and 
provide estimates of the capital requirements with and without this treatment. 
186. 
Use of de minimis modelling thresholds that are much higher than the data 
collection thresholds should be limited and properly justified by sensitivity analysis at various 
thresholds. Moreover, changes in the de minimis modelling thresholds, when not embedded 
in the model engine and driven by specific reasons (eg discount rates), should be limited in 
number and duly motivated by the need to better capture the risk profile of the ORC.  
187. 
All operational losses above the set de minimis modelling threshold should be 
included in the calculation dataset and used, whatever their amounts, for generating the 
regulatory measures.  
188. 
Losses caused by a common operational loss event should be grouped and entered 
into the calculation dataset as a single loss, unless a bank chooses to model causality or 
dependence among those losses in a different manner. A bank’s internal loss data policy 
should establish guidelines for deciding the circumstances, types of data and methodology 
for grouping data as appropriate for their business, risk management and capital charge 
modelling needs. They should also clarify and document their individual judgments in 
applying these guidelines. A bank’s policy about the threshold and dates for single losses 
should also be applied to grouped losses. 
189. 
A bank that groups small losses above the threshold for modelling with no causal 
relations for data collection and registration purposes generally should not include them in its 
calculation dataset.  
190. 
A bank should consider applying appropriate adjustment rates on data when 
inflation or deflation effects are material. For example, when the observation period for a 
specific ORC is extensive (eg 15-20 years) due to the infrequent occurrence of loss events 
and the loss data series is not stationary, adjusting loss amounts due to discount effects 
could be the solution to recover stationarity.  
191. 
A bank should not use loss net of insurance recoveries as an input for its AMA 
models. An approach using loss net of recoveries and insurance recoveries may prove 
especially difficult in the calculation of the maximum 20% capital requirements reduction 
permitted for insurance mitigation in the Basel II Framework and discussed in Recognising 
the risk-mitigating impact of insurance in operational risk modelling. 
192.  
The recognition of insurance in operational risk capital models is in an early stage of 
development. A bank should calculate the total operational risk capital charge gross of 
insurance recovery in order to determine the 20% limit and isolate the bank’s methodology 
for modelling insurance mitigation.  
Identification of the probability distributions 
193. 
A bank should follow a well specified, documented and traceable process for the 
selection, update and review of probability distributions and the estimate of their parameters. 
38 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
This process should result in consistent and clear choices and be finalised to properly 
capture the risk profile in the tail.27 
194. 
Severity distributions play a crucial role in AMA models. That the models are often 
medium/heavy tailed implies that the final outcome is significantly impacted by the chosen 
distribution. The choice of frequency distributions has a lesser impact on the final outcome. 
195. 
The selection of probability distributions should be consistent with all elements of the 
AMA model. In addition to statistical goodness of fit, Dutta and Perry (2007) have proposed 
the following criteria for assessing a model’s suitability:28 
 
realistic (eg it generates a loss distribution with a realistic capital requirements 
estimate, without the need to implement “corrective adjustments” such as caps),  
 
well specified (eg the characteristics of the fitted data are similar to the loss data and 
logically consistent),  
 
flexible (eg the method is able to reasonably accommodate a wide variety of 
empirical data) and  
 
simple (eg it is easy to implement and it is easy to generate random numbers for the 
purpose of loss simulation). 
196. 
The process of selecting the probability distribution should be well-documented, 
verifiable and lead to a clear and consistent choice. To this end, a bank should generally 
adhere to the following: 
(a) 
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) for each ORC to better understand the statistical 
profile of the data and select the most appropriate distribution; 
(b) 
Appropriate techniques for the estimation of the distributional parameters; and 
(c) 
Appropriate diagnostic tools for evaluating the quality of the fit of the distributions to 
the data, giving preference to those most sensitive to the tail. 
197. 
In order to examine the statistical properties of each ORC (ie homogeneity, 
independence, stationarity29), a bank should make use of statistical tools which include, but 
are not limited to, scatter plots, time series autocorrelation plots, empirical distribution plots, 
histograms and regression analysis. Other tools, such as p-p plots, q-q plots and mean 
excess plots provide preliminary evidence on the type and shape of the probability 
distributions which better represent the data. 
198. 
The Range of Practice Paper reveals a wide range of practices for the estimate of 
the severity distributions, with 31% of AMA banks applying a single distribution to all the data 
and nearly 50% using two separate distributions for the body (or HFLI region) and the tail (or 
LFHI region). 
                                                
27  The considerations in this principle and the following are broadly limited to the severity distribution. The 
frequency distribution doesn’t usually constitute a relevant issue, especially in presence of medium or heavy 
tailed data. 
28  “A Tale of Tails: an empirical analysis of loss distribution models for estimating operational risk capital”, K. 
Dutta, J. Perry, 2007, Federal Reserve of Boston Working papers, No 6-13 
29  An ORC is homogeneous when the data of the ORC are of the same or similar nature under the operational 
risk profile, independent when no form of dependence or correlation is identifiable across them, stationary 
when the characteristics of the data do not change when shifted in time or space. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
39
 
 
 
199. 
The operational risk data from a severity perspective clearly illustrate positive 
skewness and medium-heavy tailedness (leptokurtosis). In statistical terms, this may mean 
that not all the statistical moments of the severity distribution exist; in many cases the 2nd 
moment (ie the standard deviation) and higher moments, although always empirically 
calculable, are often enormous due to the relevant dispersion of the data.  
200. 
A bank should pay particular attention to the positive skewness and, above all, 
leptokurtosis of the data when selecting a severity distribution. In particular, when the data 
are medium/heavy tailed (therefore very dispersed in the tail), the use of empirical curves to 
estimate the tail region is an unacceptable practice due to the inability to extrapolate 
information beyond the last observable data point.30 
201. 
In such cases the use of so-called sub-exponential distributions31 is highly 
recommended. Subexponential distributions, which sometimes have a higher number of 
parameters than light tailed curves, can better represent the shape of the data in the tail 
(other than their skewness in the body) by allowing estimates of parameters that do not 
depend on the higher order statistical moments.  
202. 
When separate distributions for the body and the tail are used, a bank should 
carefully consider the choice of the body-tail modelling threshold that distinguishes the two 
regions. The bank should provide documented statistical support, supplemented as 
appropriate by qualitative elements, for the selected threshold, as the threshold may 
significantly impact the capital requirements. Ideally the estimate of the body-tail modelling 
threshold should be made conjunctly with the parameters of the distribution; however for 
practical reasons banks tend to first identify the threshold and then estimate the parameters. 
EDA instruments like the hill plot and the mean excess function plot can be useful in the 
determination of the threshold. A bank should employ sound methods to connect the body 
and tail distributions. In particular, jumps in the probability mass function when attaching the 
body and tail of the distributions should be avoided, in order to guarantee that the LFHI and 
HFLI regions are mutually exclusive and are properly reflected in the aggregated 
distribution.32 
203. 
When estimating the parameters of the distribution, a bank should take into account 
the incompleteness of the calculation dataset in the model (eg due to the presence of de 
minimis modelling threshold(s) which may or may not coincide with the data collection 
threshold). The bank should provide evidence that an incomplete calculation dataset does 
not adversely impact the credibility and accuracy of the parameter estimates and capital 
requirements. 
                                                
30  In general the same principle should apply to AMA models based on scenario analysis (SBA). Just in limited 
cases, for example when the biggest data point is demonstrated to be larger or equal in amount to the event 
that occurs less than once in 1000 years, the use of empirical curves to estimate the tail may be accepted in 
SBA models. In any case this is acceptable only if the far tail is based on well constructed scenario data and 
the bank has strict standards for the use of the empirical tail distribution, for instance that the tail contains 
sufficient data points that are far outside the internal loss data. 
31  Sub-exponential distributions are those distributions whose tail decays slower than the Exponential 
distribution. The class of Sub-exponential distributions includes the Lognormal, Lognormal-Gamma, Log-
Gamma, Generalised Pareto, Burr, Weibull (with shape parameter < 1). The Weibull (with shape parameter > 
1) and Gamma distributions do not belong to the class of Sub-exponential distributions. 
32  Indeed, a jump of the probability at the threshold could assign to High Impact events a very different 
probability of occurrence than that suggested by their Low Frequency nature. This would determine an 
improper estimation of the tail of the aggregated distribution.  
40 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
204. 
A bank should pay particular attention to the estimate of the kurtosis-related 
parameters, which describe the tail region of the losses. Because of data scarcity, the 
estimates can be highly unstable. The bank should put in place methodologies to reduce 
estimate variability and provide measures of the error around these estimates (eg confidence 
intervals, p-values). 
205. 
Robust estimation methods (such as alternatives to classical methods as the 
Maximum Likelihood and the Probability Weighted Moments), proposed recently in 
operational risk literature,33 are reasonably efficient under small deviations from the assumed 
model. These methods also highlight which observations or deviating substructures have the 
greatest influence on the statistic to be estimated. A bank may adopt alternatives to classic 
estimators, provided it can demonstrate that its use does not underestimate risk in the tail. 
These estimators may also be used as a diagnostic technique for evaluating the sensitivity of 
the capital charge to the chosen parameter estimation method. 
206. 
A bank should assess the quality of fit between the data and the selected 
distribution. The tools typically adopted for this purpose are graphical methods (which 
visualise the difference between the empirical and theoretical functions) and quantitative 
methods, based on goodness-of-fit tests. In selecting these tools, a bank should give 
preference to graphical methods and goodness-of-fit tests that are more sensitive to the tail 
than to the body of the data (eg the Anderson Darling upper tail test).  
207. 
While diagnostic tools provide information on the quality of fit between the data and 
each distribution, they do not always lead to a clear choice of the best-fitting distribution. 
Moreover, the results of the goodness-of-fit tests are usually sensitive to the sample size and 
the number of parameters estimated. In such cases, a bank should consider selection 
methods that use the relative performance of the distributions at different confidence levels. 
Examples of selection methods may include the Likelihood Ratio, the Schwarz Bayesian 
Criterion and the Violation Ratio.34 
208. 
A bank should have a regular cycle to verify assumptions underlying the probability 
distributions they have selected. These verifications may follow the criteria and tests a bank’s 
use in the selection of the probability distribution. If assumptions are invalidated, alternative 
methods should be tested and implemented. However, any change should be properly 
justified. In particular, after suffering one or more significant losses in an ORC, a bank should 
not decide to replace the probability distributions used in that ORC with lighter-tailed 
curves.35 
                                                
33  On the topic of robust estimators, see, among others: Dell’Aquila, R. and Embrechts, P.: “Extremes and 
robustness: a contradiction?” (Financial Markets and Portfolio Management, 2006); Dell’Aquila, R. and 
Ronchetti, E.: “Robust statistics and econometrics with economic and financial applications” (New York: Wiley 
2006); McNeil, A., Frey, R. and Embrechts, P.: “Quantitative risk management: concepts, techniques and 
tools” (Princeton: Princeton University Press 2005). See also Chernobai, A. and Rachev, S.T.: “Applying 
Robust Methods to Operational Risk Modelling” (Journal of Operational Risk, 1(1), pp. 27-41, 2006) for the 
discussion on the topic and an overview of the literature on robust statistics. 
34  In particular, the Schwarz Bayesian Criterion adjusts each distribution test for sample size and the number of 
parameters, while the Violation Ratio measures the performance of the distributions at different confidence 
levels by comparing the estimated and expected number of violations. 
35  The occurrence of a very large loss indicates that the risk profile of the bank is increased or, in the most 
favourable situation, that this was a very rare, not repeatable, event. None of these cases would determine a 
reduction of the capital charge of the ORC. In such cases, it may be appropriate to replace the probability 
distributions with heavier-tailed curves. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
41
 
 
 
Additional considerations for AMA models based on scenario analysis  
209. 
Many observed SBA models do not apply statistical inference to raw scenario data. 
Very often the SBA-model curves are predetermined and the scenario data are used only to 
estimate the parameters of those distributions (usually by percentile matching).  
210. 
While this approach is very common in practice, banks generally use the same 
curve (usually the Lognormal) for modelling the severity of the scenario data across all 
ORCs, regardless of its business, size and complexity. The selection of a single curve across 
ORCs implies that the only admissible driver of variation in the operational risk exposure lies 
in the scenario driven parameter estimates of the chosen distribution.  
211. 
A bank should ensure that the loss distribution(s) chosen to model scenario analysis 
estimates adequately represents the risk profile of the ORCs. In doing so, banks should also 
consider the potential differences with an LDA in terms of level of granularity and 
dependence across the ORCs.36 
Determination of aggregated loss distributions and risk measures  
212. 
The techniques to determine the aggregated loss distributions should ensure 
adequate levels of precision and stability of the risk measures. The risk measures should be 
monotonic, reasonable and supplemented with information on their level of accuracy. 
213. 
Banks use several statistical techniques to generate the aggregated loss 
distributions from frequency and severity curves and parameter estimates. Given the type of 
distributions adopted in the context of operational risk, it is especially difficult to represent the 
aggregated loss distributions by closed form curves. As such, simulation, numerical or 
approximation methods are necessary to derive aggregated curves (eg Monte Carlo 
simulations, Fourier Transform-related methods, Panjer algorithm and Single Loss 
Approximations).  
214. 
A bank should adopt criteria that mitigate sample and/or numerical related errors 
and provide a measure of the magnitude of these errors, regardless of the techniques used 
to aggregate frequency and severity distributions. 
215. 
Where Monte Carlo simulations are used, the number of steps to be performed is an 
important variable. Good modelling practice suggests that the number should be consistent 
with the shape of the distributions and with the confidence level to be achieved. In particular, 
where the distribution of losses is heavy tailed and measured at a high confidence level, the 
number of steps should be sufficiently large to reduce sampling variability to an acceptable 
level. In order to do this, a bank can use either (i) a very large number of iterations or (ii) a 
dynamic number of iterations. The latter, which is typically more accurate, allows the 
                                                
36  For instance, let’s suppose that in a LDA the ORCs coincide with the Basel Event Types and are supposed 
perfectly correlated. Moreover, let’s suppose that a SBA has a higher granularity than the LDA (i.e. a number 
of ORCs coincident with all the organisational units) and that envisages independence across the ORCs. Even 
if each ORCs severity in the SBA were modelled by lighter distributions that those used in the LDA, the 
different level of granularity and the independence across the ORCs envisaged in the SBA makes it possible 
to produce bank’s aggregated risk estimates which are comparable with those stemming from the LDA. This 
may happen because in the SBA the less conservative assumptions in terms of risk within and across the 
ORCs (i.e. the use of lighter severity distributions than those in the LDA and the hypothesis of independence 
across the ORCs) could be counterbalanced by the higher number of ORCs to which the model is applied (i.e. 
the level of granularity). 
42 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
simulation process to stop when the marginal variation of the risk measure, or some other 
dispersion index, is close to zero.  
216. 
If Fourier Transform or other numerical methods are used, a bank should pay 
attention to algorithm stability and error propagation issues. 
217. 
The risk measure is a single statistic extracted from the aggregated loss distribution 
at the desired confidence level. The most common and, so far, most adopted measure in risk 
management, including operational risk, is the Value at Risk (VaR). However, in certain 
applications and fields, including risk management, Shortfall measures (eg Expected 
Shortfall, Median Shortfall) have also gained acceptance in representing the whole tail region 
and in providing a coherent risk estimate (under a sub-additivity perspective). 
218. 
Whichever risk measure is adopted, a bank should ensure that the measure (and 
the overall AMA model) fulfils the monotonic principle of risk,37 which can be seen in the 
generation of higher capital requirements when the underlying risk profile increases.  
219. 
It is also crucial that the risk measures (while using conservative criteria and 
assumptions for prudential purposes) are realistic from a managerial and economical 
perspective. In specific cases, banks may adopt distributions that envisage the non existence 
of the first moment (ie the mean), as this would determine high capital requirements and 
would not be easily and clearly justifiable and applicable within the firm. 
220. 
A bank should recognise that the estimated capital charge is inherently uncertain 
due to the heaviness and scarcity of operational risk losses in the tail region. As such, the 
bank should explicitly recognise this variability in their estimates and provide measures of the 
error around these estimates. 
221. 
A bank should also gather information on the expected loss. Due to its high 
sensitivity to extreme losses, the arithmetic mean can cause an inaccurate picture for the 
expected losses. In light of this, the use of statistics that are less influenced by extreme 
losses (eg median, trimmed mean) is recommended, especially in the case of medium/heavy 
tailed datasets. 
Correlation and dependence 
Background 
222. 
Paragraph 669(d) of the Basel II Framework states that, “Risk measures for different 
operational risk estimates must be added for purposes of calculating the regulatory minimum 
capital requirement. However, the bank may be permitted to use internally determined 
correlations in operational risk losses across individual operational risk estimates, provided it 
can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the national supervisor that its systems for determining 
correlations are sound, implemented with integrity and take into account the uncertainty 
surrounding any such correlation estimates (particularly in periods of stress). The bank must 
validate its correlation assumptions using appropriate quantitative and qualitative 
techniques.”  
                                                
37  A measure of risk ρ(x) is monotonic if ρ(x) < ρ(y) for x < y. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
43
 
 
 
223. 
Dependence in operational risk may arise from exposure to common process or 
structural factors (eg people, businesses processes, IT systems) or from environmental 
factors (eg a change in legal risk associated with certain business practices) that affect 
multiple areas of the firm. These factors can influence the observed frequency or severity of 
losses within a bank. 
224. 
Dependence modelling for operational risk is an evolving area, with banks pursuing 
many different approaches for incorporating dependence effects. However, the choice of 
dependence approach can have a significant impact on the capital requirements generated 
by the model. It is thus important to ensure that cross-bank differences in dependence 
approach do not lead to spurious differences in exposure estimates. 
General observations 
225. 
The results of the LDCE and Range of Practice Paper indicate significant 
differences in banks’ approaches to modelling dependence. Of the AMA banks surveyed, 
29% do not model dependence or correlation estimates in their AMA. This percentage is 
higher in Australia (60%) and Japan (86%). 
226. 
Expert judgment (40%) is the primary means used to estimate dependence, 
followed by internal loss data (36%) and external data (17%). European and North American 
banks use a combination of these sources. However, more North American banks use 
external loss data to estimate dependence (60%) than other region. No banks use external 
loss data to model dependence in Australia and Japan and only one bank in Europe. 
227. 
Dependence is introduced into the modelling process mainly by use of copulas 
(43%). Of the banks using Copulas, most (83%) use a Gaussian copula. Less than one-fifth 
of AMA banks (17%) use a correlation matrix to model dependence. A significant number of 
banks (31%) use methods other than a copula or correlation matrix. Most of the respondents 
that use dependence/correlation estimates use the dependence as an input in the model 
through aggregate losses. 
Supervisory guidelines 
228. 
Dependence assumptions should be supported to the greatest extent possible by an 
appropriate combination of empirical data analysis and expert judgment. It is important to 
recognise that using internal and external data to model dependence presents challenges, as 
data limitations observed in the univariate context (modelling loss distributions for single 
ORCs) are likely to be more significant in the multivariate context (modelling multiple ORCs). 
Using judgment to model dependence presents its own challenges, as eliciting accurate but 
subjective estimates is more difficult in the multivariate context than in the univariate context. 
As such, the specification of dependence structures represents one of the most significant 
challenges in AMA modelling. 
229. 
Assumptions regarding dependence should be conservative given the uncertainties 
surrounding dependence modelling for operational risk. Consequently, the dependence 
structures considered should not be limited to those based on Normal or Normal-like (eg T-
Student distributions with many degrees of freedom) distributions, as normality may 
underestimate the amount of dependence between tail events. 
230. 
The degree of conservatism should increase as the rigor of the dependence model 
and the reliability of the resulting capital requirements estimates decrease. Accordingly, 
models assuming statistical independence across all loss events would require a very high 
44 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
degree of rigour. Such rigor may be difficult to attain given the evolving nature of 
dependence modelling for operational risk. It is important to note that the trade-off between 
rigor and conservatism will function only within certain bounds; supervisors would not accept 
a high degree of conservatism to compensate for an approach to dependence that suffered 
from fundamental deficiencies.  
231. 
Losses within each ORC should be independent of each other.38 If this is not the 
case, either within-ORC dependence should be modelled explicitly or the input data should 
be modified to achieve independence across individual losses.39  
232. 
Dependence should not be inappropriately affected by the choice of granularity. For 
example, many operational risk management frameworks assume statistical independence 
between losses within the same ORC. To the extent that a bank’s framework has only a few 
ORCs, the impact of dependence may be inappropriately minimised. In such a situation, it 
may be preferable to simply add capital estimates across ORCs. 
233. 
A bank should perform sensitivity analyses and stress testing (eg different 
parameter values and different correlation models) on the effect of alternative dependence 
assumptions on its operational risk capital charge estimate. A bank should have a rigorous 
process in place specifying the conditions under which the results based on alternative 
dependence assumptions would lead to a revision of the operational risk capital 
requirements estimate. 
234. 
Given the evolving nature of dependence modelling for operational risk, it may be 
difficult to meaningfully differentiate the impact of dependence at one bank versus another. 
One would thus expect some degree of cross-bank consistency in the overall impact of 
dependence. 
Use of the four data elements 
235. 
The AMA of a bank requires the use of four data elements which are: internal loss 
data (ILD); external data (ED); scenario analysis (SA) and business environment and internal 
control factors (BEICFs). This section outlines the Committee’s expectations with respect to 
the use of these four data elements to produce a credible and robust estimate of the 
operational risk capital charge. 
Background 
236. 
Paragraphs 667 and 669 of the Basel II Framework state the following with respect 
to the AMA framework: 
(a) 
“Any operational risk measurement system must have certain key features to meet 
the supervisory soundness standard set out in this section. These elements must 
                                                
38  Given that it could be challenging to prove statistically the independence of losses within an ORC, sound 
logical arguments may be used to evaluate the independence of such losses. For example, losses arising 
from the same root cause would not generally be considered independent. 
39  This can be achieved, for example, by integrating data which show strong cross dependence into a single data 
point. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
45
 
 
 
include the use of internal data, relevant external data, scenario analysis and factors 
reflecting the business environment and internal control systems.”  
(b) 
“A bank needs to have a credible, transparent, well-documented and verifiable 
approach for weighting these fundamental elements in its overall operational risk 
measurement system...”  
(c) 
“A bank must be able to demonstrate that its approach captures potentially severe 
‘tail’ loss events...”  
237. 
The Basel II Framework clearly anticipated that there would be a need for different 
“combinations” of the data elements depending on the behaviour of the loss generating 
process.40 The Basel II Framework envisions that the onus is on the bank to illustrate that the 
combination of the four data elements is sufficient for the purpose of estimating high 
percentiles.  
238. 
Banks benefit from the flexibility to explore different options for combining the four 
data elements within a model to produce a reliable capital requirements estimate. However, 
the Basel Committee has indicated that there would be a review and refinement of the Basel 
II Framework as appropriate. As such this section provides some further guidance on the use 
of the four data elements within an AMA model based on the results of the Range of Practice 
and LDCE Papers and other supervisory observations. 
General observations 
239. 
Various aspects of the contribution to capital requirements and the use of the four 
data elements in modelling are addressed in Tables 17 A-B and 18 A-C of the Range of 
Practice Paper. The cross-bank median and inter-quartile range of the percentage 
contributions to the capital charge for the direct effect of each of the data elements have 
been consolidated in Table 1.  
                                                
40  “For example, there may be cases where estimates of the 99.9th percentile confidence interval based 
primarily on internal and external loss event data would be unreliable for business lines with a heavy-tailed 
loss distribution and a small number of observed losses. In such cases, scenario analysis, and business 
environment and control factors, may play a more dominant role in the risk measurement system. Conversely, 
operational loss event data may play a more dominant role in the risk measurement system for business lines 
where estimates of the 99.9th percentile confidence interval based primarily on such data are deemed reliable. 
In all cases, the bank’s approach for weighting the four fundamental elements should be internally 
consistent…” (Basel II Accord - Paragraph 669(f)). 
46 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
Table 1 
Percentage direct contribution to capital charge of each data element - Cross-bank 
medians and inter-quartile ranges for the 2008 LDCE. The figures in brackets in the top 
row are the number of participating AMA banks for each region 
 
 
 
All (42) 
Australia (5) 
Europe (20) 
Japan (7) 
North 
America (10) 
SA 
55 
50 
64 
84 
33 
  
(33 – 84) 
(40 – 93) 
(33 – 75) 
(75 – 85) 
(15 – 38) 
ED 
37 
27 
38 
- 
37 
  
(25 – 45) 
(25 – 45) 
(25 – 48) 
- 
(25 – 40) 
ILD 
31 
16 
36 
15 
50 
  
(15 – 50) 
(8 – 36) 
(13 – 46) 
(15 – 16) 
(30 – 83) 
BEICFs 
11 
- 
19 
- 
8 
  
(5 – 18) 
- 
(11 – 60) 
- 
(5 – 11) 
 
240. 
The proper interpretation of the results reported in Table 1 can be challenging as 
each element’s direct contribution to the operational risk capital charge is difficult to estimate. 
The table nonetheless provides a broad overall picture of each element’s influence within a 
bank’s capital model. The results of Table 1 reveal distinct jurisdictional differences. Most 
noticeable is the higher direct impact ILD had on the capital charge of North American banks 
when compared to all other regions. For institutions in Australia and Japan, ILD had a much 
lower impact on capital requirements than it did for those at institutions in North America and 
Europe.41 SA had the most significant impact on the capital requirements of Japanese, 
European and Australian institutions. With the exception of Japanese banks, the direct use of 
ED appears to be reasonably consistent across regions. 
241. 
A closer analysis of the data provided by AMA banks42 for the 2008 LDCE, as 
shown below in Table 243 and Figure 1, reveal that there are also significant differences in 
the loss experience of banks in different regions. Figure 1 presents the relative regional 
percentage of the average number of losses per bank for each severity range.44 In particular, 
banks in Australia and Japan have experienced a much smaller percentage of losses per 
bank for all severity ranges compared to banks in Europe and North America. While the 
majority of losses across each of the severity ranges were experienced by banks in Europe 
                                                
41  In the 2008 LDCE results, the South African data is included in the European region. 
42  For the purposes of the 2008 LDCE, an “AMA bank refers to a bank that is targeting or has implemented the 
AMA approach in its implementation of Basel II”. 
43  Table 2 presents some previously unpublished results from the 2008 LDCE. This table represents three years 
of loss data from the ‘stable’ dataset. 
44  For each severity range, the regional percentages are calculated as the average number of losses (ie the total 
number of losses for the region divided by the number of AMA banks in that region) as a percentage of the 
sum of the average number of losses across regions. Consequently, for each severity range, the percentages 
sum to 100%. The data for these calculations is taken from Table 2. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
47
 
 
 
and North America, on average the typical North American bank experienced up to nearly 
twice the number of losses as their European counterparts across all severity ranges.  
Table 2 
Number of losses for AMA banks within each severity range for each region as 
reported in the 2008 LDCE. The figures in brackets in the top row are the number of 
AMA banks that submitted internal loss data for each region 
Severity Range (X) 
All (41) 
Australia 
(5) 
Europe 
(20) 
Japan (7) 
North 
America 
(9)45 
€20,000  ≤  X  <  €100,000 
88,337 
2,063 
45,311 
1,636 
39,327 
€100,000  ≤  X  <  €1 
Million 
23,541 
528 
13,910 
410 
8,693 
€1 Million  ≤  X  <  €2 
Million 
1,408 
33 
820 
20 
535 
€2 Million  ≤  X  <  €5 
Million 
935 
31 
553 
6 
345 
€5 Million  ≤  X 
662 
22 
341 
11 
288 
 
Figure 1: Relative regional percentage of the  
average losses per bank for each severity range. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
€20,000  ≤  X  <  €100,000
€100,000  ≤  X  <  €1 Million €1 Million  ≤  X  <  €2 Million€2 Million  ≤  X  <  €5 Million
€5 Million  ≤  X
Australia
Europe
Japan
North America
 
242. 
In terms of more severe losses, there were less than 300 loss events between €10 
million and €100 million, and less than 40 loss events greater than €100 million in the all 
                                                
45  Although 42 AMA participated in the LDCE (10 of which were from North America), one North American AMA 
institution did not submit internal loss data. 
48 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
region dataset.46 These results, combined with those of Table 2, highlight that the relatively 
few high severity loss events present challenges to modelling the tail of loss distributions 
using only ILD, particularly for the majority of institutions with a low frequency of large events. 
It is therefore necessary for banks to consider the impact of relevant external data and 
scenarios for producing meaningful estimates of the capital charge. 
243. 
Considering the results of Tables 1 and 2 together reveals: 
(a) 
The relative contributions of ILD and SA for North American banks compared to 
other regions may in part reflect the relative availability of ILD in each region; 
(b) 
The direct influence of SA within the capital models of European banks is 
significantly higher than for North American banks, despite having a reasonably 
comparable amount of ILD in relative terms; and 
(c) 
The exceptionally small sample sizes of large internal losses, for both Australian and 
Japanese banks, necessitate greater reliance on the other data elements. 
244. 
The 2008 Range of Practice Tables 18B and 18C confirm that scenario data and ED 
are used to quantify the severity of at least the low frequency and high severity events, which 
are influential in the determination of the final capital charge.47 
Supervisory guidelines 
245. 
The Committee recognises that there will be jurisdictional differences in the use of 
the four data elements because of: 
(a) 
The quantity and relevance of the available loss data; and 
(b) 
Different emphasis in the regulatory assessment of quantitative methodologies 
(which may in part be a reflection or a cause of point a). 
246. 
In light of these acknowledged differences, there are certain modelling approaches 
that have been developed which the Committee believes are within an acceptable range of 
practice with respect to the use of the four data elements.  
Internal loss data 
247. 
While the Basel II Framework provides flexibility in the way a bank combines and 
uses the four data elements in its operational risk management framework (ORMF), 
supervisors expect that the inputs to the AMA model are based on data that represent or the 
bank’s business risk profile and risk management practices. ILD is the only component of the 
AMA model that records a bank's actual loss experience. Supervisors expect ILD to be used 
in the operational risk measurement system (ORMS) to assist in the estimation of loss 
frequencies; to inform the severity distribution(s) to the extent possible; and to serve as an 
input into scenario analysis as it provides a foundation for the bank’s scenarios within its own 
risk profile. The Committee has observed that many banks have limited high severity internal 
                                                
46  The regional breakdown for the number of losses for higher severity ranges from the 2008 LDCE data have 
not been reported because of confidentiality concerns.  
47  Seven out of the ten North American banks report using scenarios for quantifying the severity of low 
frequency/high severity events, although this translates into a relatively small contribution to their overall 
capital. 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
49
 
 
 
loss events to inform the tail of the distribution(s) for their capital charge modelling. It is 
therefore necessary to consider the impact of relevant ED and/or scenarios for producing 
meaningful estimates of capital requirements.  
External data 
248. 
ED provides information on large actual losses that have not been experienced by 
the bank, and is thus a natural complement to ILD in modelling loss severity. Supervisors 
expect ED to be used in the estimation of loss severity as ED contains valuable information 
to inform the tail of the loss distribution(s). ED is also an essential input into scenario analysis 
as it provides information on the size of losses experienced in the industry. Note that ED may 
have additional uses beyond providing information on large losses for modelling purposes. 
For example, ED may be useful in assessing the riskiness of new business lines, in 
benchmarking analysis on recovery performance, and in estimating competitors’ loss 
experience. 
249. 
While the ED can be a useful input into the capital model, external losses may not fit 
a particular bank’s risk profile due to reporting bias. Reporting bias is inherent in publicly-
sourced ED and therefore focuses on larger, more remarkable losses. A bank should 
address these biases in their methodology to incorporate ED into the capital model.  
250. 
As ED may not necessarily fit a particular bank’s risk profile, a bank should have a 
defined process to assess relevancy and to scale the loss amounts as appropriate. A data 
filtering process involves the selection of relevant ED based on specific criteria and is 
necessary to ensure that the ED being used is relevant and consistent with the risk profile of 
the bank. To avoid bias in parameter estimates, the filtering process should result in 
consistent selection of data regardless of loss amount. If a bank permits exceptions to its 
selection process, the bank should have a policy providing criteria for exceptions and 
documentation supporting the rationale for any exceptions. A data scaling process involves 
the adjustment of loss amounts reported in external data to fit a bank’s business activities 
and risk profile. Any scaling process should be systematic, statistically supported, and should 
provide output that is consistent with the bank’s risk profile.  
251.  
To the extent that little or no relevant ED exists for a bank, supervisors would expect 
the model to rely more heavily on the other data elements. Limitations in relevant ED most 
frequently arise for banks operating in distinct geographic regions or in specialised business 
lines. 
Scenario analysis 
252. 
A robust scenario analysis framework is an important element of the ORMF. This 
scenario process will necessarily be informed by relevant ILD, ED and suitable measures of 
BEICFs. While there are a variety of integrated scenario approaches, the level of influence of 
scenario data within these models differs significantly across banks.  
253. 
The scenario process is qualitative by nature and therefore the outputs from a 
scenario process necessarily contain significant uncertainties. This uncertainty, together with 
the uncertainty from the other elements, should be reflected in the output of the model 
producing a range for the capital requirements estimate. Thus, scenario uncertainties provide 
a mechanism for estimating an appropriate level of conservatism in the choice of the final 
regulatory capital charge. Because quantifying the uncertainty arising from scenario biases 
continues to pose significant challenges, a bank should closely observe the integrity of the 
modelling process and engage closely with the relevant supervisor. 
50 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
254. 
Scenario data provides a forward-looking view of potential operational risk 
exposures. A robust governance framework surrounding the scenario process is essential to 
ensure the integrity and consistency of the estimates produced. Supervisors will generally 
observe the following elements in an established scenario framework: 
(a) 
A clearly defined and repeatable process; 
(b) 
Good quality background preparation of the participants in the scenario generation 
process; 
(c) 
Qualified and experienced facilitators with consistency in the facilitation process; 
(d) 
The appropriate representatives of the business, subject matter experts and the 
corporate operational risk management function as participants involved in the 
process; 
(e) 
A structured process for the selection of data used in developing scenario estimates; 
(f) 
High quality documentation which provides clear reasoning and evidence supporting 
the scenario output; 
(g) 
A robust independent challenge process and oversight by the corporate operational 
risk management function to ensure the appropriateness of scenario estimates;  
(h) 
A process that is responsive to changes in both the internal and external 
environment; and 
(i) 
Mechanisms for mitigating biases inherent in scenario processes. Such biases 
include anchoring, availability and motivational biases. 
BEICFs 
255. 
BEICFs are operational risk management indicators that provide forward-looking 
assessments of business risk factors as well as a bank’s internal control environment. 
However, incorporating BEICFs directly into the capital model poses challenges given the 
subjectivity and structure of BEICF tools. Banks continue to investigate and refine measures 
of BEICFs and explore methods for incorporating them into the capital model.  
256. 
BEICFs are commonly used as an indirect input into the quantification framework 
and as an ex-post adjustment to model output. Ex-post adjustments serve as an important 
link between the risk management and risk measurement processes and may result in an 
increase or decrease in the AMA capital charge at the group-wide or business-line level. 
Given the subjective nature of BEICF adjustments, a bank should have clear policy 
guidelines that limit the magnitude of either positive or negative adjustments. It should also 
have a policy to handle situations where the adjustments actually exceed these limits based 
on the current BEICFs. BEICF adjustments should be well-supported and the level of 
supervisory scrutiny will increase with the size of the adjustment. Over time, the direction and 
magnitude of adjustments should be compared to ILD, conditions in the business 
environment and changes in the effectiveness of controls to ensure appropriateness. BEICFs 
should, at a minimum, be used as an input in the scenario analysis process.  
Combining the elements 
257. 
There are various ways that an AMA model can be constructed to effectively 
incorporate the four data elements. A bank should carefully consider how the data elements 
are combined and used to ensure that the bank’s operational risk capital charge is 
commensurate with its level of risk exposure. A bank should provide a clearly articulated 
rationale for their modelling choices and assumptions and conduct sufficient research and 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
51
 
 
 
analysis to support their decisions. The approach adopted should also encourage ownership 
of the outcomes and be readily understood by the business. It is highly desirable that there is 
no disconnect between the measurement and the management of operational risk within the 
bank. The Committee recognises that operational risk modelling continues to evolve and 
encourages further investigation into the combination of the four data elements within AMA 
models. 
Mixing of outcomes from AMA sub-models 
258. 
The Range of Practice Paper recognises that “[t]here are numerous ways that the 
four data elements have been combined in AMA capital models and a bank should have a 
clear understanding of the influence of each of these elements in their capital model”. In 
some cases it may not be possible to: 
(a) 
Perform separate calculations for each data element; or 
(b) 
Precisely evaluate the effect of gradually introducing the different elements. 
259. 
While in principle this may be a useful mathematical approach, certain approaches 
to modelling may not be amenable to this style of decomposition. However, regardless of the 
modelling approach, a bank should have a clear understanding of how each of the four data 
elements influences the capital charge. 
260. 
A bank should avoid arbitrary decisions if they combine the results from different 
sub-models within an AMA model. For example, in a model where internal and external loss 
data are modelled separately and then combined, the blending of the output of the two 
models should be based on a logical and sound statistical methodology. There is no reason 
to expect that arbitrarily weighted partial capital requirement estimates would represent a 
bank’s requisite capital requirements commensurate with its operational risk profile. Any 
approach using weighted capital charge estimates needs to be defensible and supported, for 
example by thorough sensitivity analysis that considers the impact of different weighting 
schemes. 
Combining data elements within the capital model 
261. 
The combination of data elements within the capital model can provide the 
opportunity for the development of an integrated and self-consistent modelling framework. 
However, there are significant challenges that banks will need to address when combining 
data elements (eg combining scenario data or ED directly with ILD). The combination of data 
elements should be based on a sound statistical methodology. The Committee will continue 
to monitor progress in the development of robust techniques to combine data elements. 
52 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
Appendix 
Reference Material 
International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised 
Framework 
– 
Comprehensive 
Version, 
BCBS, 
June 
2006, 
available 
at 
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs128.htm 
Results from the 2008 Loss Data Collection Exercise for operational risk, BCBS, July 2009, 
available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs160.htm 
Observed range of practice in key elements of Advanced Measurement Approaches (AMA), 
BCBS, July 2009, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs160.htm 
Observed range of practice in key elements of Advanced Measurement Approaches (AMA), 
BCBS, October 2006, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs131.htm 
Principles for enhancing corporate governance – final document, BCBS, October 2010, 
available at www.bis.org/publ/bcbs176.htm 
Recognising the risk-mitigating impact of insurance in operational risk modelling, BCBS, 
October 2010, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs181.htm 
Extremes and robustness: a contradiction?, Dell’Aquila, R. and Embrechts, P., Financial 
Markets and Portfolio Management, 2006  
Robust statistics and econometrics with economic and financial applications, Dell’Aquila, R. 
and Ronchetti, E., New York: Wiley 2006  
Quantitative risk management: concepts, techniques and tools, McNeil, A., Frey, R. and 
Embrechts, P., Princeton: Princeton University Press 2005  
Applying Robust Methods to Operational Risk Modelling, Chernobai, A. and Rachev, S.T., 
Journal of Operational Risk, 1(1), pp. 27-41, 2006  
A Tale of Tails: An Empirical Analysis of Loss Distribution Models for Estimating Operational 
Risk Capital, Dutta, K. and Perry, J., 2007, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper 
No 06-13. 
A Framework for Internal Control Systems in Banking Organisations, BCBS, September 
1998, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs40.htm  
Internal audit in banks and the supervisor’s relationship with auditors, BCBS, August 2001, 
available at http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs84.htm 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
53
 
 
 
Glossary of terms 
Basel II 
“Basel II Framework” and “Basel II”, used interchangeably in this report, refer to the Basel 
Committee’s International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A 
Revised Framework (June 2006). 
Operational risk capital 
Unless explicitly mentioned otherwise, this term refers to the capital requirements for the 
AMA under pillar 1 of Basel II, as stated in paragraph 655 of the Basel II Framework. 
Operational Risk management function (CORF) 
This term refers to the independent operational risk management function that is responsible 
for the design and implementation of the bank’s operational risk management framework, as 
mentioned in paragraph 666(a) of the Basel II Framework. 
Operational Risk management framework (ORMF) 
The ORMF consists of a bank’s: 
(a) 
risk organisational and governance structure;  
(b) 
policies, procedures and processes; 
(c) 
systems used by a bank in identifying, measuring, monitoring, controlling and 
mitigating operational risk; and  
(d) 
operational risk measurement system. 
Operational Risk measurement system (ORMS) 
A bank’s ORMS consists of the systems and data used to measure operational risk in order 
to estimate the operational risk capital charge. Figure 1 in the Governance section of this 
paper illustrates the relationship between an ORMF and an ORMS. 
Operational Risk Category (ORC) 
An Operational Risk Category (ORC) or unit of measure is the level (for example, 
organisational unit, operational loss event type, risk category, etc.) at which the bank's 
quantification model generates a separate distribution for estimating potential operational 
losses. This term identifies a category of operational risk that is homogeneous in terms of the 
risks covered and the data available to analyse those risks. 
Risk appetite and tolerance 
”Risk appetite” is a high-level determination of how much risk a firm is willing to accept taking 
into account the risk/return attributes; it is often taken as a forward looking view of risk 
acceptance. ”Risk tolerance” is a more specific determination of the level of variation a bank 
54 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches
 
 
 
Operational Risk – Supervisory Guidelines for the Advanced Measurement Approaches 
55
 
 
is willing to accept around business objectives that is often considered to be the amount of 
risk a bank is prepared to accept. In this document the terms are used synonymously. 

 
ͪवदेशी मुद्रा ͪवभाग, केंद्रȣय कायार्लय, केंद्रȣय कायार्लय भवन, शहȣद भगत ͧसंह मागर्, फोटर्, मुंबई-400 001, भारत 
Foreign Exchange Department, Central Office ,Central Office Building., Shahid Bhagat Singh Road, Fort, Mumbai-400 001, India  
टेलȣफोन/Tel. No.022-22601000 फैक्स/Fax No. 022- 22665330 अमर भवन फोन 022-22603000 फैक्स 22694935, ईमेल: helpfed@rbi.org.in 
Ǒहंदȣ में काम करना आसान है, इसका प्रयोग बढ़ाइए । 
RBI/2026-27/82 
A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.10                                                              May 13, 2026 
 
To 
All Authorised Dealers 
Madam / Sir, 
 
Operating framework for facilitating Outward Remittance services by non-
bank entities through Authorized Dealer (Category I) banks in India 
 
Attention of Authorised Persons is invited to Master Direction - Miscellaneous (Master 
Direction No. 19/2015-16 dated January 1, 2016), as amended from time to time. 
 
2. Paragraph 10 of the Master Direction provided a framework under which non-bank 
entities could obtain specific approval from the Reserve Bank for tie-up 
arrangements to facilitate outward remittance services through Authorised Dealer 
Category-I banks in India subject to certain conditions.  
 
3. On a review, it has been decided to dispense with the process of granting of the 
approvals by RBI for such tie-ups and instead Authorised Dealers are advised to 
comply with instructions furnished in Annex while facilitating cross-border outward 
remittance of funds for non-trade current account transactions using third party entity 
in online mode (website/ online platform/ software application/ mobile application/ 
any other interface). Therefore, the para 10 of the Master Direction - Miscellaneous 
dated January 1, 2016 (as amended from time to time) stands deleted with 
immediate effect. 
 
4. The directions contained in this circular have been issued under sections 10(4) 
and 11(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) and are 
without prejudice to permissions / approvals, if any, required under any other law. 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
 
(N Senthil Kumar)  
Chief General Manager 
 
 
1 
 
Annex 
A. Instructions to be complied with by the Authorised Dealers (ADs) while 
facilitating cross-border outward remittance of funds for non-trade current 
account transactions using third party entity in online mode (website/ online 
platform/ software application/ mobile application/ any other interface) are as 
given below:-  
 
1. Compliance - The AD, shall remain solely responsible for ensuring compliance of 
the transactions with FEMA and undertaking Know Your Customer (KYC) in 
accordance with the A.P. DIR Series Circular No. 16 dated November 28, 2025, as 
amended from time to time issued by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
 
2. Information to be displayed prominently to the customer remitting funds 
through website/ online platform/ software application/ mobile application/ any 
other interface of the third party – 
 
2.1 The name of the AD involved in the remittance, its roles and responsibilities in 
relation to the remittance, its status of authorization (AD Category-I/ II) along with the 
name of the AD whose foreign exchange (FX) rate will be used for the conversion. 
 
2.2 The FX rate quoted by the AD along with timestamp and period of validity of the 
rate for the transaction. 
 
2.3 The total estimated cost of the transaction along with break-up of the exchange 
rate (interbank rate and mark-up separately), service charges, other charges, if any, 
with  description without any ambiguity. 
 
2.4 The exact amount in foreign exchange that will be credited along with the 
maximum time taken for crediting the beneficiary’s account. 
 
2.5 The contact details of the officer for customer grievance redressal (telephone 
number and email address), along with timelines for dispute resolution. 
 
3. Invoice: The AD, which provides the exchange rate and the foreign exchange, 
shall ensure that an invoice is generated and issued by the third-party to the 
customer for every transaction indicating – 
2 
 
(a) Break-up of final amount including exchange rate (interbank rate and mark-up 
separately), service charge and other charges levied by the third-party, if any, with 
descriptions without any ambiguity. 
(b) The amount remitted by remitter and amount that will be credited in the beneficiary 
account. 
(c) The maximum time period in hours required for the credit of the amount in the 
beneficiary account. 
(d) The name of the AD quoting the FX rate. 
 
4. Display of information on the website/ application/ mobile/ any other 
interface of AD – 
 
4.1 In the context of the arrangements so entered into with third party, the AD shall 
update the homepage of its website, inter-alia, with the names of all third-party entities 
with whom they have arrangements for online remittance along with its role and 
responsibility in each of the said arrangement with the contact details (telephone 
number and email address) of the officer for customer grievance redressal. 
 
4.2 AD shall ensure that its policy regarding storage of customer data including the 
type of data that will be stored, the purpose of the data and the period of storage, is 
prominently displayed on the website. 
 
5. Agreement with third party - 
 
5.1 The agreement entered into by the AD with the third party shall in no manner 
dilute or absolve the AD of its obligations under any statutory or regulatory provision, 
and the AD shall be fully responsible and liable for all acts and omissions of the third 
party. 
 
5.2 The agreement of AD with the third party shall explicitly specify the following - 
a. The rights, obligations, and responsibilities of both parties in the transaction 
flow, including scope of services; 
b. Data handling and confidentiality; 
c. Data privacy; 
3 
 
d. Dispute resolution mechanisms; 
e. Audit / Information sharing rights (to seek complete details of the transaction 
and process followed with the checks and balances). 
f. Compliance with applicable laws; 
g. Quoting of exchange rate to the remitter as quoted by AD; 
h. Scope of engagement; 
i. Permitted activities; 
j. Risk mitigation frameworks (including operational resilience and concentration 
risk management); 
k. Refund policy; 
l. Internal controls for compliance with FEMA, 1999. 
 
5.3 The third party shall have a comprehensive Privacy Policy compliant with 
applicable laws, associated regulation and RBI guidelines, which shall be made 
available publicly and accessible easily. 
 
6. Grievance redressal - The AD shall have a formal grievance redressal framework 
in compliance with RBI guidelines.  
 
7. Internal policy - The AD shall have an internal policy for entering into such 
arrangements with third-party entities with focus on the customer service, customer 
protection and transparency including the following - 
 
a. Responsibility of the AD to uphold the remitter’s interests, including timely 
execution of transactions in a transparent manner. 
b. Data privacy safeguards: AD shall ensure that any collection of data (including 
personal information) by the third party is need based and with prior and explicit 
consent of the remitter and it cannot be shared except for cases where such 
sharing is required as per statutory or regulatory requirement including 
compliance with the provisions of the Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) 
Act and the Rules framed thereunder, wherever applicable.  
c. AD shall ensure that they as well as the third party comply with various 
technology standards / requirements on cybersecurity stipulated by RBI and 
other relevant agencies, or as may be specified from time to time.  
4 
 
 
8. Ensure end-to-end settlement - The AD shall ensure that the remittance reaches 
the intended beneficiary’s bank account within the timeline specified to the remitter. 
In case of any delay beyond the specified time the remitter should be able to track 
the status of the transaction. 
 
9. Handling fund - AD shall ensure the safety and security of the remitter’s funds 
and suitably ringfence them from any kind of insolvency risks. In addition, the AD 
must ensure that remitter’s funds do not, at any stage, flow into the account of the 
third party in India. 
 
10. Banking Channel - The remittances shall be permitted only for fund transfers 
originated from the remitter’s bank account and ending at the beneficiary’s bank 
account. 
 
11. Non-Resident third Party - If the third-party entity is a person resident outside 
India, then the entity shall be duly licensed (in case this activity requires a license in 
that jurisdiction) by the regulator of destination jurisdictions to facilitate remittances 
to beneficiaries in such jurisdictions.  
 
Note: FATF Statements circulated by RBI from time to time, and publicly available 
information, for identifying countries, which do not or insufficiently apply the FATF 
Recommendations, shall be considered while making outward remittances. ADs shall 
apply enhanced due diligence measures, which are effective and proportionate to 
the risks, to business relationships and transactions with natural and legal persons 
(including financial institutions) from such countries. 
 
 B. In case the AD has arrangement with a third-party entity for the door step delivery 
of forex card or foreign currency notes  to  the buyer who has placed order on a third 
party entity’s website/ application/ mobile/ any other interface, then the AD shall 
ensure that relevant paragraphs specified above, related to transparency, customer 
grievance and customer protection are complied with by the AD and the concerned 
third-party entity. 
*** 
